THE THIRST FOR ANNIHILATION
NICK LAND

An important literary and philosophical figure, Georges Bataille
has had a significant influence on other French writers, such as
Foucault, Derrida and Baudrillard. The Thirst for Annihilation is the
first book in English to respond to his writings. In no way, though,
is Nick Land’s book an attempt to appropriate Bataille’s writings
to a secular intelligibility or to compromise with the aridity of
academic discourse - rather, it is written as a communion.

Theoretical issues in philosophy, sociology, psychodynamics,
politics and poetry are discussed but only as stepping stones into
the deep water of textual sacrifice where words pass over into the
broken voice of death. Cultural modernity is diagnosed down to its
Kantian bedrock with its transcendental philosophy of the object
but Bataille’s writings cut violently across this tightly disciplined
reading to reveal the strong underlying currents that bear us
towards chaos and dissolution - the violent impulse to escape, the
thirst for annihilation.

Nick Land, whose aim is to spread what he calls ‘the virulent
horror’ of Bataille’s writings, himself writes with a vividness and
commitment more usually associated with works of literature than
intellectual investigations. This book is of relevance to everyone
interested in the philosophy of desire, the psychopathology of
deviance, political and legal theory, the history of religion or
poetry. It is also urgent for all those intrigued by their sexual
torments or the death they mistakenly conceive of as their own.


Nick Land is a lecturer in Continental Philosophy at Warwick
University.





The thirst for annihilation


Georges Bataille and virulent
nihilism (an essay in atheistic
religion)


Nick Land



London and New York




First published in 1992
by Routledge

11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE

Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge

a division of Routledge, Chapman and Hall Inc.

29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001

© 1992 Nick Land

Typeset in 10/12 pt Baskerville by Columns Design and
Production Services Ltd, Reading
Transferred to digital printing 2003


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Land, Nick, 1962-

The thirst for annihilation: Georges Bataille and virulent
nihilism: an essay in atheistic religion/Nick Land,
p. cm.

1. Bataille, Georges, 1897-1962 - Philosophy. 2. Nietzsche,
Friedrich Wilhelm, 1844-1900 - Influence. 3. Nihilism
(Philosophy) in literature. 4. Atheism in literature. I. Title.
PQ2603.A695Z74 1992

848’.91209-dc20 91-36365

CIP


ISBN 0-415-05607-1

0-415-05608-X (pbk)



The profundity of the tragic artist lies in this, that his aesthetic instinct
surveys the more remote consequences, that he does not halt
shortsightedly at what is closest to hand, that he affirms the large-
scale economy which justifies the terrifying, the evil, the questionable —
and more than merely justifies them [N III 575].


there is nothing
except

the impossible

and not God [III 47].


Zero is immense.




Contents


Reference codes ix

Preface xi

1 ‘The death of sound philosophy’ 1

2 The curse of the sun 27

3 Transgression 58

4 Easter 75

5 Dead God 80

6 The rage of jealous time 92

7 Fanged noumenon (passion of the cyclone) 1 05

8 Fluent bodies (a digression on Miller) 121

9 Aborting the human race 133

10 The labyrinth 160

11 Inconclusive communication 184

Notes 211

Bibliography 215

Name index 218

Subject index 220





Reference codes


Wherever a reference consists of a Roman numeral followed by an
Arabic one it indicates a volume and page number in Bataille’s
Oeuvres Completes.

Other collected works are indicated by an initial letter or letters,
followed by the same key. These are:

A Aquinas

B Boltzmann

H Hegel

K Kant

L Lukacs

N Nietzsche

S Sade

Sch Schopenhauer

Other codes refer to specific texts rather than collected works:

Cap Marx, Capital Volume One

CG Augustine, The City of God

Ch Gleick, Chaos

DH Walker, The Decline of Hell

Gr Marx, Grundrisse

Hay Hayman, De Sade

PCD Plato, Collected Dialogues

PES Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism

Pol Aristotle, Politics

R Rimbaud, Collected Poems

SD Ragon, The Space of Death

Spu Derrida, Spurs

TC Miller, The Tropic of Cancer

TE Cioran, La Tentation d’Exister





Preface


As though to give yourself a certain ‘positive’ assurance, which
harbored as well a suspicion of superiority, you have often
reproached me for what you call my ‘appetite for destruction’
[TE 113].

The reasons for writing a book can be led back to the desire to
modify the relations which exist between a human being and its
kind. Those relations are judged unacceptable and are perceived
as an atrocious wretchedness.

However, to the extent that I have written this book I have
been conscious that it is impotent to regulate the account of that
wretchedness. Up to a certain limit, the desire for perfectly clear
human exchanges which escape general conventions becomes a
desire for annihilation [II 143].

*

I have always unconsciously sought out that which will beat me
down to the ground, but the floor is also a wall.

*

What best befits an author is to preface a work with its apology,
ornamenting it with the gilt of necessity. After all, one should not
beg attention without excuse. That a writer provide some
rudimentary justification for a book seems a modest enough
expectation, but such a demand obliterates me, since this is a text
which has been reared in perfect superfluity, clutching feebly at
zero. There is not a single sentence which is other than a
gratuitousness and a confusion; a cry at least half lamed and
smothered in irony. Each appeal that is made to the name
‘Bataille’ shudders between a pretension and a joke. Bataille. I



xii Preface


know nothing about him. His obsessions disturb me, his ignorances
numb me, I find his thought incomprehensible, the abrasion of his
writing shears uselessly across my inarticulacy. In response I
mumble, as a resistance to anxiety, maddening myself with words.
Locked in a cell with my own hollow ravings . . . but at least it is
not that . . . (and even now I lie) ...

In truth, Bataille seems to me far less an intellectual predica-
ment than a sexual and religious one, transecting the lethargic
suicide upon which we are all embarked. To accept his writings is
an impossibility, to resist them an irrelevance. One is excited
abnormally, appalled, but without refuge. Nausea perhaps? Such
melodrama comes rapidly to amuse (although we still vomit, just
as we die).

So I try to persuade myself that it would have been relatively
straightforward to write a sound book on the work of Georges
Bataille; a book that would have discussed the contribution he has
made to the philosophical and literary culture of twentieth-century
France, expositing his doctrines of ‘general economy’, ‘base
materialism’, and ‘atheology’, appraising the excellences of his
various prose styles and his poetry, recommending that his works
be invested by serious reading, scholarship, and eventually a
judicious estimation - by my reckoning, a schlecht book. Such books
are always depressing enough, but in the case of Georges Bataille
the situation is even more acute, touching on something akin to the
pure pornography characterizing our contemporary Nietzsche
scholarship. To succeed in writing a book of any kind about Bataille
is already something wretched, because it is only in the twisted
interstitial spaces of failure that contact, infection, and - at the
limit - the anegoic intimacy that he calls ‘communication’ can take
place. A recovery of the sense of Bataille’s writing is the surest path
to its radical impoverishment. It is as pathetic to seek education
from Bataille as it is to seek comfort from Nietzsche. (Bataille is, of
course, somewhat more honest than this about his own hypocrisies.)

There is no doubt that to season Bataille in preparation for his
comfortable digestion by capital’s cultural machine is a piece of
twisted prostitution of the kind he would fully have appreciated.
The delicious obscenity! A writer who tried to help us to expend,
stored away with all the others in our reserve of informatico-
financial assets, in order to be pimped out into the career flows of
the Western academies. There are North Americans who have
already learnt to gurgle ‘Bataille contra Marx’ for instance,




Preface xiii


although the issue is rarely this inanely ideological. More insidious
is the ‘he was a librarian you know’ Bataille, increasingly snarled-
up in the deconstructivist pulp industry of endless commentary on
Logocentrism, Western Metaphysics, and other various Seinsverges-
senheiten, the Bataille who read a lot, and had something very clever
to say. Bataille may be praised or condemned in terms of his
erudition, but this scarcely matters when compared with his
sanctity as a voyager in sickness . . . but books make good burrows
in which to hide, and few places are as redolent of the little escape as
a library; the shelves of fiction, history, geography, each book a
pretext for derealization, patiently awaiting the moment when it
will be coupled to some vague reverie.

Not that this book makes any special pleading for itself, it has
scratched about for needles in the most destitute gutters of the
Earth, cold-turkey crawling on its knees, and begging the academy
to pimp it ever deeper into abuse. Ever since it became
theoretically evident that our precious personal identities were just
brand-tags for trading crumbs of labour-power on the libidino-
economic junk circuit, the vestiges of authorial theatricality have
been wearing thinner. Who cares what ‘anyone’ thinks, knows, or
theorizes about Bataille? The only thing to try and touch is the
intense shock-wave that still reaches us along with the textual
embers ... for as long, that is, as anything can still ‘reach us’.
Where Descartes needed God to mediate his relations with his
fellows, secular man is happy with his television set, and with all
the other commodified channels of pseudo-communication with
which his civilization has so thoughtfully endowed him. Such
things are for his own protection of course; to filter out the
terrifying threat of infection. If openness to alterity, base
communication, and experimental curiosity are marks of an
exuberant society, its only true gauge lies in its tendency to be
decimated by sexually transmitted diseases and nihilist religion.
On this basis it seems that our society, despite its own most
strenuous efforts, has not yet consummated its long idealized
sclerosis into impermeable atoms. The grit still exists, and it is only
amongst the grit that we connect.

*

It is 03.30 in the morning. Let us say one is ‘drunk’ - an
impoverished cipher for all those terrible things one does to one’s
nervous-system in the depths of the night - and philosophy is




xiv Preface


‘impossible’ (although one still thinks, even to the point of terror
and disgust). What does it mean for this episode in the real history
of spirit to die without trace? Where has it strayed to? ‘I thought of
death, which I imagined to be similar to that walk without an
object (but the walk, in death, takes this path without reason -
“forever”)’ [III 286],

An extraordinary lucidity, frosty and crisp in the blackness, but
paralysed; lodged in some recess of the universe that clutches it like
a snare. A wave of nausea is accompanied by a peculiarly
insinuating headache, as if thought itself were copulating unreser-
vedly with suffering. A damp coldness, close to fog, creeps through
the open window. I laugh, delighted at the fate that has turned me
into a reptile. The metallic hardness of intellect seems like a cutting
instrument in my hand; the detached fragment from a machine
tool, or an abattoir, seeking out the terminal sense it was always
refused.

The object of philosophy, insofar as the reflective meditation
upon thought can be taken to characterize it, is arbitrarily
prescribed as undisturbed reasoning (the cases of psychopathology,
psychiatry, abnormal psychology, etc. do not remotely contravene
this rigorous selection, because such studies of disturbed thought
are constituted - in principle - without entanglement). It is thus
that successfully adapted, tranquil, moderate, and productive
reason monopolizes the philosophical conception of thought, in the
same way that the generalized robotism of regulated labour
squeezes all intense gestures out of social existence. My abnormal
devotion to Bataille stems from the fact that nobody has done more
than he to obstruct the passage of violent blanks into a pacified
oblivion, and thus to awaken the monster in the basement of
reason.

Not that the repressed is locked in a dungeon, it is stranded in a
labyrinth, and connected to the daylit world by a secret continuity.
A tangle of confusion comes to seem like a door, a maze like a
barrier, and one says ‘I’, but the inside is not a cell, it is a corridor;
a passage cut from the soft rock of loss. Inner experience traverses
a sombre porosity, and the moans of the minotaur reverberate
through its arteries, hinting at an indefinable proximity. It
becomes difficult to sleep.

*

Of course, I indulge myself, in innumerable ways. ‘I’ tell myself the



Preface xv


personal pronoun fails to mark the pseudo-neutral position of a
commentator this time. That is rather a protraction of ‘Bataille’s’
incessant je into a further episode of debasement. For it is
remarkable how degraded a discourse can become when it is
marked by the obsessive reiteration of the abstract ego, mixing
arrogance with pallid humility. The chronic whine that results -
something akin to a degenerated reverberation from Dostoyevsky’s
underground man - is the insistence of a humanity that has
become an unbearable indignity. ‘I’ am (alone), as the tasteless
exhibition of an endogenous torment, as the betrayal of com-
munication, as a festering wound, in which the monadic knitting of
the flesh loses itself in a mess of pus and scabs, etc. etc. . . . (You
yawn of course, but I continue.) Yes, / am - defnitionally - a filthy
beggar (like God), scrabbling at the coat-tails of a reluctant and
embarrassed attentiveness, driven into a guile that fuses wretched-
ness with an elusive element of threat. Is it mere indolence that
defeats all tendency towards decorous impersonality? Scarcely. Or
rather; I cannot bring myself to think so. I nag at the margins of
this discourse on the writings of Georges Bataille as a hideous
confirmation of its cowardice and moderation, simultaneous with
the dreariness of its prostitution; a wheezing parody of laughter
teetering upon the abject nakedness of a sob. Yet at the same time
it scarcely matters whether I write of Bataille or myself. If there is
a boundary between us it is only insofar as he was momentarily
frustrated in his passage to the truth of his text.

Bataille’s writing exhibits a marked attachment to the first
person pronoun, and the confessional mode is especially predomin-
ant in his more ‘literary’ works, although it spreads almost
everywhere. The most obvious consequence of this device is to
immerse the narrative ego in the text, fusing voice and discourse in
a field of immanence, and putting identity unreservedly into play
(enjeu). Not only is most of the fiction published during Bataille’s
lifetime narrated in the first person - including The Story of the Eye ,
Madame Edwarda , The Impossible, The Abbe C., and The Blue of Noon -
but in every case more than one confessional voice is involved -
even after the various egos of dialogue are excluded - whether this
is the result of ‘authorial’ prefaces, or stratified narrative
structures. The Abbe C., for example, includes no less than three
distinct first person narrative voices, and temporal ruptures in the
order of its discourses complicate the situation still further. There
is an unmanageable appeal, a plight of isolation, a voice resistant




xvi Preface


to all delimitation, an infection, so that reading Bataille is not a
contribution to positivity, but a plea.

It does not befit beggars to garb themselves in the robes of proud
neutrality, the matter is quite to the contrary; no one sinks beneath
the burden of individuality as they do. If beggars are so often
driven to religion it is because it can never be in the rational
interest of anyone to respond to them. They must inherit the
tradition of unanswered cries encrypted in monastic cells. These
mendicants have certainly been destituted in an echo of the death
of God, but with no space awaiting them in the secular order they
are forced to live their limitless impoverishment as an impossible
necessity. As for myself (Bataille also) the matter is altogether
more comic.

Do not think I am unsympathetic. These thickets of abstract
identity are no doubt unpleasant to stumble through. The scrawny
little sign of promiscuous individuality is a perpetual aggravation;
reminding you in each case of your own incarceration by self. That
enunciation should be harried by an ‘I’ is no mere stylistic
infelicity, it is a loathesomeness, and yet the only routes of evasion
leading away from it are hypocritical. To try and hide the manacle-
scars which wreck the complexion of the text would itself be a
decisionistic celebration of autonomy, debasing the text further,
branding it even more conclusively as servile matter (out of which
the ego has transcended into invisibility). To write oneself out of a
book can be many things; the dilettantism of one for whom writing
is from the start affectation and artificiality, the professionalism of
one for whom a book tends to an anonymity - if not immediately to
that of the commodity, at least to that of career capital - the
authoritarianism of one lost in a monological insanity close to
solipsism, or the all-too-ostentatious humility of one who prefers to
guide from behind the scenes. It can be genuine timidity,
pomposity, inertial apathy, even experiment, but what it can never
be, for as long as it is remotely deliberated, is flight.

It is still tempting to renounce the posture of the first person,
even though its force of corrosive qualification reduces the risk of
complacent objectivism or pseudo-collectivity. The indulgences of
personality, of spurious autonomy, responsibility, and idiosyncratic
affectation, are sufficiently repellent to provoke a measure of
tactical carelessness. One paralyses a dimension of messy effec-
tivity, out of distaste. But to write of Bataille in such a way is more
than a little absurd, suggesting, as it does, that impersonality is a




Preface xvii


simple thing to achieve. After all: the ‘I’ is not to be expelled, but
submitted to sacrifice. When shuffled about within a text upon
Bataille it is compelled to refer not to an author, but rather, to an
ennui, gesticulating at the void; the symptom of an absent tragic
community.

*

It is a long time now since I was afflicted by Bataille’s poem ‘Rire’
(‘Laughter’):

Laugh and laugh
at the sun
at the nettles
at the stones
at the ducks

at the rain

at the pee-pee of the pope
at mummy

at a coffin full of shit [IV 13].

This poem introduces three of the must crucial themes traversing
Bataille’s writing: laughter, excrement, and death. Such ‘themes’
are suspended only momentarily at the lip of philosophical
intelligibility, and then released into a euphoric immolation upon
the burn-core of literature, disintegrating into a senseless hetero-
geneous mass. His texts obsessively reiterate that the decomposed
body is excremental, and that the only sufficient response to death
is laughter. The corpse not only dissolves into a noxious base
matter analagous to excrement, it is also in fact defecated as waste
by the life of the species. For the corpse is the truth of the
biological individual, its consummate superfluity. It is only
through the passage into irredeemable waste that the individual is
marked with the delible trace of its excess. It is because life is pure
surplus that the child of ‘Rire’ - standing by the side of his quietly
weeping mother and transfixed by the stinking ruins of his father -
is gripped by convulsions of horror that explode into peals of mirth,
as uncompromising as orgasm. ‘Rire’ is, in part, a contribution to
the theory of mourning. Laughter is a communion with the dead,
since death is not the object of laughter: it is death itself that finds
a voice when we laugh. Laughter is that which is lost to discourse,
the haemorrhaging of pragmatics into excitation and filth.




xviii Preface


Bataille tells us that the universe is energetic, and the fate
inherent to energy is utter waste. Energy from the sun is
discharged unilaterally and without design. That fraction of solar
radiation which strikes the earth resources all terrestrial en-
deavour, provoking the feverish obscenity we call ‘life’.

Life appears as a pause on the energy path; as a precarious
stabilization and complication of solar decay. It is most basically
comprehensible as the general solution to the problem of consumption.
Such a solar- or general-economic perspective exhibits production
as an illusion; the hypostatization of a digression in consumption.
To produce is to partially manage the release of energy into its loss,
and nothing more.

Death, wastage, or expenditure is the only end, the only
definitive terminus. ‘Utility’ cannot in reality be anything but the
characterization of a function, having no sense short of an
expenditure which escapes it utterly. This is ‘relative utility’. The
order of Western history has as its most pertinent symptom the
drift of utility away from this relative sense, towards a paradoxical
absolute value. A creeping slave morality colonizes value, subor-
dinating it to the definition ‘that which serves’. The ‘good’ becomes
synonymous with utility; with means, mediation, instrumentality,
and implicit dependence.

The real trajectory of loss is ‘immanence’, continuity, base
matter, or flow. If the strictly regional resistance of everything that
delays, impedes, or momentarily arrests the movement of dissolu-
tion is abstracted from the solar flow it is interpretable as
transcendence. Such abstract resistance to loss is characterized by
autonomy, homogeneity, and ideality, and is what Bataille
summarizes as ‘(absolute) utility’.

The (inevitable) return of constricted energy to immanence is
religion, whose core is sacrifice, generative of the sacred. Sacrifice
is the movement of violent liberation from servility, the collapse of
transcendence. Inhibiting the sacrificial relapse of isolated being is
the broad utilitarianism inherent to humanity, correlated with a
profane delimitation from ferocious nature that finds its formula in
theology. In its profane aspect, religion is martialled under a
conception of God; the final guarantor of persistent being, the
submission of (ruinous) time to reason, and thus the ultimate
principle of utility.

Cowering in the shadow of its gods, humanity is the project of a
definitive abrogation of expenditure, and is thus an impossibility.




Preface xix


The humanizing project has the form of an unsustainable law.
Despite the fortifications of prohibition, the impossible corrodes
humanity in eroticism ; the eruption of irreducible excess, which is
the base unity of sexuality and death. Eroticism gnaws us as the
inevitable triumph of evil (utter loss).

It is this passionate submission to fate (= death) that guides
Bataille’s own readings, in Literature and Evil for instance, the
greatest work of atheological poetics. Literature and Evil is a series of
responses to writing that exhibit the complicity between literary art
and transgression. Bataille’s insistent suggestion is that the non-
utilitarian writer is not interested in serving mankind or furthering
the accumulation of goods, however refined, delicate, or spiritual
these may be. Instead, such writers - Emily Bronte, Baudelaire,
Michelet, Blake, Sade, Proust, Kafka, and Genet are Bataille’s
examples in this text - are concerned with communication, which
means the violation of individuality, autonomy, and isolation, the
infliction of a wound through which beings open out into the
community of senseless waste. Literature is a transgression against
transcendence, the dark and unholy rending of a sacrificial wound,
allowing a communication more basic than the pseudo-com-
munication of instrumental discourse. The heart of literature is the
death of God, the violent absence of the good, and thus of
everything that protects, consolidates, or guarantees the interests of
the individual personality. The death of God is the ultimate
transgression, the release of humanity from itself, back into the
blind infernal extravagance of the sun.

*

It is a mere consolation to the timid to imagine that philosophy has
died. The fact of the matter is quite to the contrary. Philosophy
will be the last of human things; perhaps the efficient impulse of
the end. That humanity is fated to terminate is amongst the most
basic thoughts, and no more than the most elementary qualifica-
tion for philosophy, since to think on behalf of one’s species is a
miserable parochialism.

Man is a little thing that has learnt to stammer the word
‘infinity’. In doing so it makes everything small, diminishing even
itself. One need only dip into the history of monotheism to note the
wretchedness of human ‘infinities’ in comparison to the most
casual of natural immensities. It is first necessary for a thing to
shrivel for it to share anything with us; to become ‘humane’.




xx Preface


Insofar as nature can be injured or offended by us, it is mere
surface, superfice, sensitive skin. Profound nature - matter — is
something else; the indifferent and the inviolable. (It is deeper,
therefore, than God.) This deep nature suffers nothing, resents
nothing, makes no cases. It is only in the shallows that one ever
finds a defence.

There is one simple criterion of taste in philosophy: that one
avoid the vulgarity of anthropomorphism. It is by failing here that
one comes to side with cages. The specifics follow straightfor-
wardly:

1 Thoroughgoing dehumanization of nature, involving the ut-
termost impersonalism in the explanation of natural forces, and
vigorously atheological cosmology. No residue of prayer. An
instinctive fastidiousness in respect to all the traces of human
personality, and the treatment of such as the excrement of
matter; as its most ignoble part, its gutter . . .

2 Ruthless fatalism. No space for decisions, responsibilities,
actions, intentions. Any appeal to notions of human freedom
discredits a philosopher beyond amelioration.

3 Hence absence of all moralizing, even the crispest, most
Aristotelian. The penchant for correction, let alone vengefulness,
pins one in the shallows.

4 Contempt for common evaluations; one should even take care to
avoid straying accidentally into the right. Even to be an enemy is
too comforting; one must be an alien, a beast. Nothing is more
absurd than a philosopher seeking to be liked.

Libidinal materialism is the name for such a philosophy,
although it is perhaps less a philosophy than an offence.
Historically it is pessimistic, in the rich sense that transects the
writings of Nietzsche, Freud, and Bataille as well as those of
Schopenhauer. Thematically it is ‘psychoanalytical’ (although it no
longer believes in the psyche or in analysis), thermodynamic-
energeticist (but no longer physicalistic or logico-mathematical),
and perhaps a little morbid. Methodologically it is genealogical,
diagnostic, and enthusiastic for the accentuation of intensity that will
carry it through insurrection into anegoic delirium. Stylistically it
is aggressive, only a little sub-hyperbolic, and - above all -
massively irresponsible . . .

Such thinking is less concerned with propositions than with
punctures; hacking at the flood-gates that protect civilization from




Preface xxi


a deluge of impersonal energy. It could be described as writing
against reservation, but any description is inevitably domesticat-
ing. It will never find its father, or its mother; it has no ultimate
ancestor of any kind. For it did not begin with Nietzsche, or with
the topico-pathological furore found in Schopenhauer, or with the
unconscious of the Kantian text, but ever further back ... It has
been the menace that provoked even the most ancient philosophy -
already Anaximander as Nietzsche suggests — to anticipate the
police. Another description might run like this: libidinal material-
ism is the textual return of that which is most intolerable to
mankind.

No one could ever ‘be’ a libidinal materialist. This is a ‘doctrine’
that can only be suffered as an abomination, a jangling of the
nerves, a combustion of articulate reason, and a nauseating rage of
thought. It is a hyperlepsy of the central nervous-system, ruining
the body’s adaptive regimes, and consuming its reserves in
rhythmic convulsions that are not only futile, but devastating.
Schopenhauer already knew that thought is medically disastrous,
Nietzsche demonstrated it. An aged philosopher is either a monster
of stamina or a charlatan. How long does it take to be wasted by a
fire-storm? By an artificial sun upon the earth? It is only when the
blaze in Nietzsche’s brain-stem fused with the one in the sky above
a piazza in Turin that libidinal materialism touched upon its
realization.

Like all ‘-isms’, libidinal materialism is at best a parody, at
worst a constriction. What matters is the violent impulse to escape
that gives this book its title. The thirst for annihilation. This name has
grown on me as an ulceration in the gut. Is it desire or its negation
that is marked here? The overcoming of the will, nihilism,
Todestrieb ? It seems to me that it is first of all the compulsion to
abstract. Historically and anthropologically considered, this is
negation torn from its logical function to become the non-objective
destination of an attachment, destituted of its formality by a
ferocious investment, besetzt, and coupled to a motor of liquidation.
So that the instrument of logical dissection is at last acknowledged
in its terrible materiality; negativity as an excitation. To rather
‘will negation than the negation of will’ [N II 839]; this is an
elusive difference, twisting like a rusted nail into sensitive flesh. Is
the primitive craving that seeks the abolition of reality an object of
philosophical investigation, or a drive accomplishing itself through
philosophy? What is it that makes use of subtlety here?




xxii Preface


Subtlety grates upon the nerves, yet everything is driven by an
immense crudity: death impassions us. Even before crossing over
into death I had been excruciated upon my thirst for it. I accept
that my case is in some respects aberrant, but what skewers me
upon zero is an aberration inextricable from truth. To be
parsimonious in one’s love for death is not to understand.

This is not to deny that the gentleness with which Hell has
treated me has been a source of considerable embarrassment. No
one less worthy of sanctity has ever twitched upon the Earth. I
slunk into Hell like a verminous cur, accompanied by a wanderer
of an altogether more celestial aspect. According to the Sikh
religion humans are the masks of angels and demons, and my own
infernal lineaments bear little ambiguity (everywhere I go the
shadows thicken). When I stare into the eyes of Bataille’s
photographic image I connect with his inexistence in a community
of the kiln. I smile.


*


My wings are ragged

they have never been licked by the sun

black and hooked on iron struts

like a poison flower of death

they only open for the night

*


In the box it seems as if the choice is yours to either dismiss or
accept my words when I insist: / have been outside the box. Like Plato,
knowing is a memory for me, but unlike him I have outlived
philosophy and aspiration, since I have outlived life itself. Death
has no representatives, but I have at least returned from the dead
(a characteristic I reluctantly share with the Nazarene). Since I
have floated in death the world has desisted from all effort to
seduce me into seriousness. I rest in life as a tramp rests in a
hedge, mumbling these words . . .




Chapter 1


‘The death of sound philosophy ’ 1


Kant’s great discovery — but one that he never admitted to — was
that apodictic reason is incompatible with knowledge. Such reason
must be ‘transcendental’. This is a word that has been propagated
with enthusiasm, but only because Kant simultaneously provided a
method of misreading it. To be transcendental is to be ‘free’ of
reality. This is surely the most elegant euphemism in the history of
Western philosophy.

The critical philosophy exposes the ‘truths of reason’ as fictions,
but cunning ones, for they can never be exposed. They are ‘big lies’
to the scale of infinity; stories about an irreal world beyond all
possibility of sensation, one which is absolutely incapable of
entering into material communication with the human nervous
system, however indirectly, a separated realm, a divine kingdom.
This is the ghost landscape of metaphysics, crowded with
divinities, souls, agents, perdurant subjectivities, entities with a
zero potentiality for triggering excitations, and then the whole
gothic confessional of guilt, responsibility, moral judgement,
punishments and rewards . . . the sprawling priestly apparatus of
psychological manipulation and subterranean power. The only
problem for the metaphysicians is that this web of gloomy fictions
is unco-ordinated, and comes into conflict with itself. Once the
fervent irrationalism of inquisition and the stake begins to crumble,
and the dogmatic authority of the church weakens to the point that
it can no longer wholly constrain philosophy within the mould of
theology, violent disputes - antinomies - begin to flourish. Due to
the ‘internecine strife of the metaphysicians’ polyglot forces begin
to be sucked into conflict, at first mobilized against particular
systems of reason, fighting under the banner of another. But
eventually a more generalized antagonism begins to emerge,




2 The thirst for annihilation


various elements begin to throw off the authority of metaphysics as
such , scepticism spreads, and the nomads begin to drift back, with
renewed elan.

Kant’s critical philosophy is the most elaborate fit of panic in the
history of the Earth. Its more brutish — and even more
consequential — ancestor was Luther’s hysterical reaction to the
disintegration of Christendom. A kind of intellectual paralysis, the
basic symptom of which was a demand for rigorous and consistent
austerity, was common to both. Like Luther, Kant was forced into
conflict with an institution steeped in tradition with which he
would have been happier to conform; if only it were strong enough
to keep the barbarians at bay. But whilst atheists (such as Hume)
threatened to wash everything away, the pope spawned bastards
and Christian Wolff pontificated absurdities. There was only one
answer, revolt in the service of the establishment, and the revolt,
once begun, was carried through with a steel dedication. What was
also common to both of these reluctant rebels was the renewed
vitality that they breathed into the antique institutions they
engaged. Within a few years of Luther, the Jesuits, after Kant,
Hegel. Catholicism and metaphysics both reborn. After all, fear is
the passionate enthusiasm for the same.

*

In speaking of modernity we acknowledge that an insatiable
historicization has befallen the Earth; a shock-wave of obsolescence
has swept away all perpetuities. Far from escaping the frenzy of
abolition, thought has been sublimed in the white heat of its outer
edge, functioning as the very catalyst of history. What is new to
modernity is a rate of the obsolescence of truth, although it is still (as I
write) possible for a good idea to last longer than an automobile. It
is natural enough, therefore, that critique is an instrument of
dissolution; a regression to conditions - to the magmic power of
presupposition - upon which all order floats. Cultures that become
critical are rapidly intoxicated by lavish metamorphic forces.
Reality becomes soluble in the madness of invention, such that it
seems as though critique were luring nature into our dreams.
Anything is allowable eventually, as long as it is extravagant
enough, and nothing that is allowable may any longer be avoided.
A critique only dates in the way capital does: cunningly. Both are
names for metamorphosis as such, reproduced in their own
substitution 2 .



'The death of sound philosophy’ 3


To describe Kant and capital as two sides of a coin is as
necessary as it is ridiculous. A strange coin indeed that can
synthesize a humble citizen of Konigsberg with the run-away
reconstruction of a planet. Yet any attempt to render such an
absurdity intelligible enmeshes us in the critical machinery that
will always be associated with Kant. If counter-balancing the
dominant mass of the real with transcendental philosophy is deeply
unjust, to which tribunal shall we appeal? To one that is more
universal? — a transcendental move. Or one that is more
ontologically profound? — a theological idiocy. Hegel sought to
treat Kant with a sense of proportion, and his failure in this regard
is also ours. This is why every variant of modern thought exhibits a
complexion of retardation, critique, and aberration, since if it does
not inertially resist the seduction of modernity’s critical resources it
is torn between the twin lures of harmonizing with them, or
venturing into the expansive obscurities beyond.

Philosophy (comprehending all ‘theory’) has no socio-historical
pertinence for us other than its relation to Kant. In the case of
Bataille such a relation is superficially obscured by the prevalence
of references to (a Kojevean) Hegel, but two obvious points can be
made here: firstly, the Hegelian text is nothing other than a
response to the predicament of transcendental philosophy, so that
all of its terminology is operative from the start within a Kantian
register, and secondly, Bataille’s philosophical vocabulary -
regardless of first appearances - is in fact, and independently of
Hegelian mediation, fated to address a Kantian inheritance. A
preliminary sample might include sovereignty (a Kantian proble-
matic before becoming a Hegelian one), the thoughts of limit, the
unknown, possibility, objectivity, and end, as well as — and above all —
the crucial difference between immanence and transcendence along with
its critical usage.

The importance of Hegel to Bataille is not immediate. It stems
from the character of Hegelian thinking as a redemption of
Kantianism; its attempt to save transcendental philosophy from
the lethal spasms welling up from within. Irrespective of his own
immensely confused intellectual project, Bataille’s reading of Hegel
is a regression into the nihilistic momentum of critique; into a
thanatropism which Kant largely misconceived, and which Hegel
attempted to speculatively excise. Hegel’s philosophy is the life-
support machine of Kantianism, the medical apparatus responding
to a crisis. When Bataille explores this machine it is not primarily




4 The thirst for annihilation


in order to understand its inherent potentiality for malfunction, but
to excavate the euthanasia it prohibits.

Hegel’s reading of Kant is complex and multifaceted, but also of
an unprecedented coherence. Its intelligibility is, in the end,
coterminous with the possibility of a system of reason, or actual
infinity. Hegel realized that the Kantian conception of infinity,
which abstractly opposes itself to finitude rather than subsuming it,
indefinitely perpetuated a dangerous tension, insofar as it asceti-
cally suspends the moment of resolution. This bad infinity - the
endless task of perpetual growth (capital) - is incapable of ever
diminishing the prospect of utter collapse. Kantian infinity is
deprived of any possibility of intervening in developmental series,
leaving them vulnerable throughout their length to the catastrophic
collision with a limit; loss of faith, war, the irruption of an
incomprehensible death. Kantian infinity is given, whereas Hegel
sets to work.

It is only a banal claim of Hegel’s own thinking that history has
no greater abjection to offer than the profound immersion in his
work. Unlike the exposition such Knechtschaft receives within
Hegelian self-understanding, however, this is not primarily because
there is no depth of servility or wretchedness to which the spirit of
the system refuses to descend, but is rather due to the fact that the
comprehensive voyage of experience that traverses such depths has
as its condition of existence the uttermost abandonment of real
independence. The filthiness and ignobility of Bataille’s writing
follows immediately from its being steeped in Hegel. This is not to
suggest that such baseness is coherent with ‘Hegelianism’ (in any
of its variants), for however immense the powers of reflexive self-
comprehension exhibited by such thinking, the supremely vicious
character of intimacy with the Hegelian text cannot be grasped
within it. Investment in the system is not itself a relation internal
to the system, and to make it so is merely to offer a hypocritical
apologia for its degradation. If Hegel’s prostitution to the Prussian
state can become speculatively intelligible, this is only at the cost of
an etherealization which, ‘in itself, is consummate abjection,
deceit, and travesty, or, put succinctly, definitive humanity.

This is not to provide the ‘justification’ for a ‘dismissal’ of Hegel.
Hegel remains strictly unintelligible to us, and any claims to the
contrary are anaemic tokens of bourgeois apologetic. Insofar as
Bataille depends upon the overcoming of Hegel he is an inanity.
That ‘Hegelianism’ is a sad farce of the academy decides nothing



The death of sound philosophy’ 5


as to its eventual sense, and if postmodernity depends upon a
‘decision’ in respect of Hegel it is a culture of accommodation
analogous to Hegel’s own crude response to Schelling, or to the
even more devastating oblivion of Schopenhauer’s thinking within
the formative phase of nineteenth century German metaphysics.
The internecine conflict between germinal possibilities of post-
Kantian thought is appropriately ‘judged’ by a laughter whose
measure is the preponderance of capital within modernity. It is as
comic as the hatred Troskyite sects bear for each other as they
squabble over the management of a future whose probability slides
asymptotically towards zero.

*

A dialectical illusion is the error - exposed by transcendental
critique - through which reason pretends to the transcendence of
itself. It is associated, on the one hand, with an objectivistic
interpretation of the intellectual forms of a representation as
independently existing structures of things in themselves, and, on
the other hand, with an attempt to grasp the subject as if it were an
entity separable from its own operations, the latter being a mistake
that Kant entitles paralogism. Descartes’ ontology of extended and
thinking substance exemplifies both of these errors. Such dialectic
is the object of critique, and is always a confusion between
conditions of possibility and their products. Kant describes this
confusion as one between conditions of objectivity and objects,
which in Marx’s case are producers (labour power) and com-
modities, in Heidegger’s being and beings, in Derrida’s writing and
the sign, etc. Such confusions misconceive the transcendental as
the transcendent, performing a gesture that can be described as
‘metaphysics’ (fetishism, ontotheology, logocentrism). For Bataille
it is the effaced difference between utilization (expenditure) and
utility which bears the brunt of critical aggression, engaging an
error to which he gives the uncompromising label ‘reason’. Profane
thought (reason) interprets making use of in terms of usefulness. It
thus loses all sense of absolute end (the transcendental condition of
value).

To repeat Kantianism (modern thought) is to perpetuate the
exacerbative displacement of critique, but to exceed it is to cross
the line which divides representation from the real, and thus to
depart both from philosophy and from the world that has expelled
it into its isolation. Critique is a matter of boundaries, or the




6 The thirst for annihilation


delimitation of domains of application for concepts. It is inherent to
critique that a terrain of unthinkability is delineated, or that limits
are set to the exercise of theoretical endeavour. The Kantian name
for the items within the legitimate field of theoretical cognition is
phenomena, whilst the extra-territorial items are called noumena or
things-in-themselves. Because the noumenon escapes the categories of
the understanding (which include modality) ‘we can neither say
that it is possible nor that it is impossible’ [K III 304], Noumena
are what escape the competence of theory, being those ‘things’
which are unknowable in principle. ‘That, therefore, which we
entitle “noumenon” must be understood as being such only in a
negative sense’ [K III 278].

The most influential attempt to establish a new coherence
between conception and its outside is Hegel’s, in particular his
phenomenological solution to the delineation of experience. Hegel
argues that the boundary of experience is produced by the
inherently self-transcending character of reason, so that the
discursive excess which is exhibited - for instance - in the word
‘noumenon’ expresses the negativity or freedom of spirit in relation
to its content. Spirit is not confined by the difference which
restricts or determines phenomenality, since it is itself its auto-
differentiation. The outside of spirit at any moment of history is
merely its own unreclaimed (alienated) work. This is not merely to
collapse Kant’s thing-in-itself back into the phenomenal world,
because Hegel does not think of spirit as a timeless (transcenden-
tally pre-given) system of cognitive faculties (in Kantian fashion),
but as a historical auto-production, in which the self is really - and
not merely reflectively - determined by the logically orchestrated
content of thinking as and through time. Hegelian history is not
formal but speculative, which means that the subject is developed -
and not merely expressed - through the series of predicates by
which ‘it’ is thought.

Hegel considered Kant’s basic failing to be an inability to see
that the limits of reason are self-legislated, so that when
intelligibility is absolutely consummated the ethical order is
recognized as commanding for nature. Spirit must abandon itself to
its noumenal extinction in the confidence that it cannot be
identified with its perishable pupal stages, but instead finds eternal
life in the thinkability of death. Finitude is only possible through a
spiritual production transcending and comprehending it as a
necessary moment of itself. Humanity becomes God in the mode of




'The death of sound philosophy’ 7


a return by expiating its finitude on the cross of history, whereby
alterity is neutralized into the reconciliatory phenomenology of
absolute spirit = God. So much for the novelty of the Hegelian
imagination.

Since Hegel the word phenomenology has fallen even further
into disrepute. Compared to the majestic pomp of the Hegelian
system the philosophy of Edmund Husserl - with which the word
‘phenomenology’ is now inextricably tangled - is a mere neo-
Kantian eccentricity. There is something profoundly infantile
about the egocentric obsession of Husserlian thought (one is
reminded of Fichte). It is only worth mentioning at all because -
primarily for socio-political reasons - it has not been without
defenders. If in the Hegelian mode of philosophizing alterity is
reduced into a collective auto-generative knowing, in the Husser-
lian mode it is reduced into a monadic ‘transcendental ego’ (at the
limit a petit bourgeois parody of Hegel’s absolute, God in the guise of
a minor state employee), for which the Kantian noumenon is
bracketed as a transcendent or naturalistic postulate. The
transcendence of the object is reconstituted on the side of the
subject as the intentionality or inherently outward-oriented
character of experience. Experience is intrinsically transcended, i.e.
to experience something as an experience of something beyond the
experience itself is simply what experience is in itself. That thought
concerns something outside itself is a transcendental structure of
thought. Rigorous phenomenology of the Husserlian type, whereby
all questions of reference are replaced by an analytic of
intentionality, leads straight to idealism and solipsism and thus, as
Schopenhauer persuasively suggests, to the madhouse (although it
is an insipid insanity they ofTer us).

An altogether richer vein of thought is that initiated by
Schelling, provoking Hegel’s famous remark concerning a ‘night in
which all cows are black’ [H III 22]. Like Hegel, Schelling saw the
weak spot of Kantianism to lie in the impossibility of a rigorous
determination of the transcendental ground of knowing, since what
is transcendental has to remain immanent to its own disjunction.
What differentiates these two philosophical modes is that where
Hegel’s Aufhebung or assimilatory negation passes though the other,
appropriating it as a mediating pause of absolute reason,
Schelling’s Indifferenz undercuts the articulated terms, exacerbating
the critical gesture, since one of the transcendentally subverted
terms is in each case the simulacrum of the transcendental. Hegelian




8 The thirst for annihilation


thought is guided by the exigency of comprehension (which at the
limit grounds itself), Schelling’s by that of transcendental ground-
ing (which at the limit comprehends all difference). In their early
nineteenth Century systematic forms these types of thinking can
seem very similar, but as they divergently concretize themselves
into contemporary philosophies of critical theory and deconstruc-
tion respectively, their difference becomes more stark. The most
important rhetorical symptom of this difference is the contrast
between an ever more nostalgic discourse on the failure of totality
on the one hand, and an ever more complacently impotent
discourse on the impossibility of radical subversion on the other. In
their recent forms both discourses make frequent and preposterous
claims to a Nietzschean inspiration.

It is not Hegel or Schelling who provide Nietzsche with a
philosophical tap-root, but rather Schopenhauer. With Schopen-
hauer the approach to the ‘noumenon’ as an energetic unconscious
begins to be assembled, and interpreting the noumenon as will
generates a discourse that is not speculative, phenomenological, or
meditative, but diagnostic. It is this type of thinking that resources
Nietzsche’s genealogy of inhuman desire, which feeds in turn into
Bataille’s base materialism, for which ‘noumenon’ is addressed as
impersonal death and as unconscious drive.

Even though Bataille exhibits little interest in Schopenhauer
(and even a measure of casual hostility), his location in relation to
the history of philosophy cannot be pursued without attending to
the meditation upon the will that Schopenhauer initiated. Kant’s
conception of the ‘will’ [ Wille] provides a certain base-line for the
thought of desire because it is the sophisticated rendering of a
crudity. The folk-psychology of intentions finds a baroque
justification in Kant’s philosophy, but scarcely even the most
fleeting interrogation. Kant rationalizes willing into transcendental
agency; the more or less lucid pursuit of ends, exhaustively
mediated by the structures of individualized representational
subjectivity. Humanism reaches its zenith in such thinking, where
the will is conceived as the condition of possibility for the efficiency
of concepts; the wholly miraculous adaptation of transcendent reality
to representation.

With Schopenhauer this notion of will inherited from Kant and
early German idealism undergoes a profound transformation. Such
terms as ‘will to power’, ‘libido’, and ‘orgone’, for instance, can be
seen to negotiate with the terminology of Kantianism only after




The death of sound philosophy’ 9


their specifically Schopenhauerean modulation has been recog-
nized. Schopenhauer no longer understands the spontaneity of will
as a predicate serving to differentiate the transcendental subject
from the inertia of matter, as Kant does. Rather, the terminology of
the will (desire) is guided through its first faltering steps towards a
notion of increate matter. Schopenhauer reserves the word ‘matter’
[Die Materie] for the fundamental determination of objectivity
within representation, which he distinguishes from the will,
whereas later thinkers beginning with Nietzsche - and including
Freud as well as Bataille - shift the sense of matter towards the
substratum of appearances (impersonal, unconscious, and real)
that Schopenhauer calls will. Increate matter is a translation of will
or noumenon; a designation for the anti-ontology basic to any
positively atheistic materialism (‘[t]o say the World was not Created
... is to deny there is a God’ writes Hobbes in his Leviathan).
Such a thought is at variance with the most prevalent scientific
conception of matter only insofar as science has - despite many of
its pronouncements — tended to be implicitly agnostic, or even
theist, rather than virulently atheistic in tendency. Due to this
dominant attitude, first systematized by Kant in his determination
of theological ideas as postulates of practical reason, matter has
continued to be implicitly conceived as ens creatum, distinguished
from a creative being which is determined as an extrinsic
spontaneity. Matter as ens creatum is essentially lawful, whilst
increate matter is anarchic, even to the extent of evading the
adoption of an essence. This is why Schopenhauer considers the
principle of sufficient reason or logicality of being to have a merely
superficial validity.

Schopenhauer reverses the traditional relation between intellect
and will, for which willing is the volitional act of a representing
subject, and re-casts the will as a pre-representational (‘blind’)
impulse. His advance is nevertheless an extremely limited one in
certain respects. He considers the anarchic character of the pre-
ontological cosmic bedrock to be morally objectionable, and
merely replaces its traditional theistic determination with an
extrinsic moral principle of absolute negation (denial of the will).
This anti-materialist dimension of his thinking can be seen as
stemming from the requirement that unlawful being should retain
the (idealistically grounded) juridical potentiality for the condem-
nation of itself. Without rigorously interrogating the basic values of
his moral heritage he continued to associate that which is not God




10 The thirst for annihilation


with radical imperfection and sin, so that unregulated will is
thought of not as irresponsibility but as malice. Perhaps it should
not surprise us to learn that Schopenhauer lent his opera glasses to
a Prussian officer in 1848, in order, as Lukacs tells us [L IX 179],
that he should have ‘a better view of the rioters at whom he was
shooting’.

*


Pessimism, or the philosophy of desire, has a marked allergy to
academic encompassment. Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Freud all
wrote the vast bulk of their works from a space inaccessible to the
sweaty clutches of state pedagogy, as, of course, does Bataille. The
most perfectly distilled attack upon institutional philosophy is
probably that found in Schopenhauer’s Parer ga and Paralipomena, in
its section entitled ‘On University Philosophy’. By the end of this
text Schopenhauer has argued that the university is inextricably
compromised by the interests of the state, that this necessarily
involves it in the perpetuation of the monotheistic dogmas that
serve such interests, and that the consequent subservience to
vulgar superstition completely devastates it; degrading it to a
grotesquely hypocritical sophistry, fuelled by a petty careerism
spiced by an envious hatred of intellectual independence, and
articulated in a wretchedly obscure and distorted jargon that
allows its proponents both to squirm away from the surveillance of
the priests, and to hypnotize a gullibly adoring public. It is
scarcely surprising that he comes to conclude:

if there is to be philosophy at all, that is to say, if it is to be
granted to the human mind to devote its loftiest and noblest
powers to incomparably the weightiest of all problems, then this
can successfully happen only when philosophy is withdrawn
from all state influence [Sch VII 200].

This distaste has been fully reciprocated. One need only take note
of Heidegger’s remarks on Schopenhauer to get a taste of the
university’s revenge upon its assailants. The crass dismissal of
Schopenhauer’s aesthetics in the first volume of Heidegger’s
Nietzsche lectures is a quite typical example, and others can be
found in Introduction to Metaphysics, his Leibniz lectures, What is
Called Thinking, etc. What is at stake in both cases is not argument,
however rancorous, but the relation of mutual revulsion between
the academy and a small defiant fragment of its outside. Neither




The death of sound philosophy' 1 1


recognizes the legitimacy of the other’s discourse; for the university
considers its other to be incompetent, whilst the part of this other -
admittedly a very small part - that has seized and learnt to
manipulate the weaponry of philosophical strife, considers the
voice of the university to be irremediably tainted by servility.

Little progress can be made in interpreting this conflict so long
as one remains attached to idealistic notions of ‘controversy’ or
‘debate’. The constitution of debates is the dominant mode of
pacification employed by the university: the validation of certain
manageable conflicts within the context of institutionalization,
moderation, and the indefinite deferral of consequences. What is
transcendental to academic debate is submission to socio-economic
power. It might even be fair to suggest that it is Schopenhauer who
first spoils the possibility of debate in this case; that Heidegger, for
instance, is already provoked. The famous story about Schopen-
hauer setting his lectures at the same times as Hegel would be an
example of this; a dramatization of the relation of exclusion that is
at least as basic to the university as dialogue. Anybody who
dismisses this gesture as mere perversity is lending implicit
credence to the notion that the university gives each a chance to
speak, providing a neutral space for the encounter of divergent
types of thought. Schopenhauer does not take any such suggestion
of academic impartiality seriously:

the state has at all times interfered in the philosophical
disputations of the universities and has taken sides, no matter
whether it was a question of Realists and Nominalists, or
Aristotelians and Ramists, or Cartesians and Aristotelians, of
Christian Wolf, Kant, Fichte, Hegel, or anything else [Sch VII
187],

Furthermore, the intervention of the state is a perpetually operative
force that is immanent to the institution itself. University
philosophy polices itself as part of its sordid flirtation with state
power:

It never occurs to a professor of philosophy to examine a new
system that appears to see whether it is true; but he at once tests
it merely to see whether it can be brought into harmony with the
doctrines of established religion, with government plans, and
with the prevailing views of the times. After all this he decides its
fate [Sch VII 167],




12 The thirst for annihilation


By precipitating a non-dialogical collision with Hegel, Schopen-
hauer certainly demonstrated a measure of tactical ineptitude, but
not strategic blindness. For it is difficult to imagine that anyone
would want to suggest that an impartial space for the discussion of
atheistic philosophy was available at the University of Berlin
during the early 1820s. The power of Schopenhauer’s diagnosis is
that it is able to attend simultaneously to both the metaphysical
conflict between philosophy and monotheism and the institutional
forestalling of this conflict. This amphibiousness invests his critique
of optimism with an enduring energy of dissent. Optimism is the
general form of apology; at once the key to the metaphysical
commitments of theology and the protection of these commitments
from vigorous interrogation. Monotheism, with its description of
the world as the creation of a benevolent God, or at least, of a God
that defines the highest conception of the good, jusifies an all
pervasive optimistic framework for which being is worthy of protection.
For the optimist revolt, critique, and every form of negativity must
be conditioned by a projected positivity; one criticizes in order to
consolidate a more certain edifice of knowledge, one revolts in
order to establish a more stable and comfortable society, one
struggles against reality in order to release being into the full
positivity which is its due. All of which inevitably slows things
down a great deal, because, unless one has a persuasive plan of the
future, negativity is de-legitimated by a prior apologetic dogma.
The suggestion is always that ‘at least this is better than nothing’,
a slogan that some Leibnizian demon has probably scrawled above
the gates of Hell (not that I have any argument with Hell).

Whilst speculative thought is the logic of social progress, a
realization of freedom by means of a gradual absorption of
conditions into the collective subject of political action, pessimism
is the affect process of unconditional revolt. The most bleak
speculative reasoning still retains a commitment to the reality of
progressive development, even if this is momentarily frozen into the
implicit truth of an agonizing contradiction. If Adorno creates
particular difficulties for such a contention it is because he creates
equivalent difficulties for speculative thought, partly because he is
abnormally sensitive to the irreducible ethnocentrism involved in
Hegel’s thinking, an ethnocentrism which is related to, although
ultimately more interesting than, the colonial triumphalism of his
philosophy of history. Its basic character is a terror of regression to
a primitiveness that would forsake the laborious advances of one’s




The death of sound philosophy’ 13


Occidental ancestors, and this is in turn a symptom of the
wretched Western nihilism that insists one has an immense amount
to lose. That our history has been in any way beneficial is
something Schopenhauer vigorously repudiates, and his vehement
anti-historicism (which Nietzsche comes to massively overhaul) has
at least this merit: it sets itself firmly against one of the basic
apologetic motifs of Occidental societies. After all, we cannot use
the word history without meaning a singular process that one
population has inflicted on several others, as well as upon its own
non-servile virtualities, a process that has combined gruesome
accident with sustained atrocity.

The speculative model of revolution is one of ‘taking over’, the
pessimistic model is one of escape; on the one hand the overthrow
of oppression-as-exploitation, and on the other the overthrow of
oppression-as-confinement. Employing an ultimately untenable
distinction it could be said that at the level of social description
these models are at least as complimentary as they are exclusive;
the extraction of labour power and the inhibition of free movement
have been complicit in the domestication of the human animal
since the beginning of settled agriculture. But at the level of
strategy a certain bifurcation begins to emerge, leading Deleuze
and Guattari, for instance, to tease apart a Western and an Eastern
model of revolution, the latter being based on a block of partially
repressed nomad desire, oriented to the dissolution of sedentary
space and the liquidation of the state 3 . Of course, insofar as one is
concerned with anything like a directly applicable concrete
programme, Schopenhauer has little to offer; what is known of his
politics has a definite reactionary slant, and he does not seem to
have grasped either the chronic exterminatory tendencies of settled
societies, or their deep arbitrariness. The alternative he proposes is
one of departure in the mode of renunciation, which is to say, he
lacked a nomadology, or failed to explore the delirial antilogic that
leads out of the maze. This is a claim at the same level as that
which accuses Hegel of lacking a convincing account of the
specifically modern dominion of commodity production, and helps
to explain the impulse to the concrete associated with Nietzsche
and with Marx.

Pessimism is not a value logically separable from an independent
metaphysics, because the logical value of identity is itself a comfort
of which pessimism destitutes us, whilst a metaphysics of the will
subverts the autonomy or separability of value questions. In this



14 The thirst for annihilation


sense, pessimism is the first truly transcendental critique, operated
against being, and in particular against the highest being, by the
impersonal negativity of time or denial. Schopenhauerians and
Hegelians can travel a considerable distance together in submitting
being unsparingly to its abolition in time, although, in the end,
speculative thought exhibits a fear of regression that looks to a
pessimistic perpective like an anti-primitivist ideology, serving the
interests of pseudo-progressive Western societies. Marx’s famous
appeal to the working class in the Communist Manifesto that they
have ‘nothing to lose but their chains’ is open to both a speculative
and a pessimistic interpretation, and it is perhaps the latter that
unleashes its most uncompromising force.

*

Part of Kant’s legacy is that no important philosopher since his
time has considered traditional theism to be theoretically defen-
sible. Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason methodically dismantles the
structure of argument for the existence of God that had been
painstakingly constructed by the scholastic and early modern
philosophers, the most important pillars of which had been the
ontological, cosmological, and teleological proofs, all of which Kant
showed to be radically untenable. Although no significant
philosopher has contested Kant’s thorough demolition of these
apologetic arguments, they have responded to it in a number of
distinct ways. Kant’s own path was the re-foundation of theistic
belief in faith guided by moral necessity. Religion became
subordinate to the immediate evidence of moral law. The post-
Kantian idealists, amongst whom the most notable are, of course,
Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, all sought to reconstruct theology on
the basis of speculative reason for which the imagery of Christian
monotheism served as something between ornamentation and
evidence of a groping historical anticipation. For these thinkers the
authority of the Kantian text had become inestimably more
authoritative than Judaeo-Christian scripture, whatever their pious
declarations to the contrary. Jacobi, Kierkegaard, and others
sought an ultra-fideism in which the absurdity of religious belief
was transmuted into a positive challenge, whilst Schopenhauer,
followed by Nietzsche, concluded that philosophy must become
savagely atheistic.

Schopenhauer was not a reluctant atheist. He considered




The death of sound philosophy' 15


monotheism to be not merely erroneous, but grotesque. Many
elements are involved in this judgement, but the most important,
both for his thought and later for Nietzsche’s, is the violent
repudiation of the massively anthropocentric tendency of such
faiths (which he interpreted antisemitically). A central and
insistent tenet of Schopenhauer’s philosophy is that intellect,
personality, and consciousness are extremely superficial and
derivative characteristics of complex nervous-systems, and are thus
radically untypical of the nature of the cosmos, which is driven by
impersonal and unconscious forces. Even in the human being
personality was nothing but an ephemeral foam, almost incidental
to its basic life-functions, and instrumental in the service of these
latter. Furthermore, the personality was not a reason for
celebration, but rather a wound, or a gore-spattered cell in which
the futile horror of existence was exhibited as squalid suffering, and
occasionally, in a few select specimens, as tragedy. The notion of a
personal God was therefore a monstrous perversion born of egoism
and blindness, an attempted justification of individuated conscious
existence that pandered to the miserable vanity of those in flight
from the only possibility of redemption: the annihilation of self. In
contradistinction from Kant, therefore, Schopenhauer considered
theism to be the apotheosis of immorality; a wretched attachment
to the principle of personal identity.

Nietzsche wholeheartedly subscribed to the basic tenets of
Schopenhauer’s diagnosis, but sought to deepen his cosmology,
and to jettison the residual egoism that lay in its continued
obsession with redemption. Nietzsche no longer considered the
sufferings of the self to be a serious objection to the basic cosmic
processes that underpinned it. Where Schopenhauer had depicted
the unconscious striving of nature as a ‘will-to-live’, whose most
sophisticated form is the egoism of the individuated human animal,
Nietzsche re-named this fundamental drive the ‘will-to-power’, for
which survival is a mere tool. For Nietzsche, life is thought of as a
means in the service of an unconscious trans-individual creative
energy. Mankind as a whole is nothing but a resource for creation,
a dissolving slag to be expended in the generation of something
more beautiful than itself. The end of humanity does not lie within
itself, but in a planetary artistic experiment about which nothing
can be decided in advance, and which can only be provisionally
labelled ‘overman’. For overman is not a superior model of man,
but that which is beyond man; the creative surpassing of humanity.



1 6 The thirst for annihilation


Nietzsche read Christianity as the nadir of humanistic slave-
morality, the most abject and impoverishing attempt to protect the
existent human type from the ruthless impulses of an unconscious
artistic process that passed through and beyond them. The mixture
of continuity and discontinuity connecting Nietzsche’s atheism
with Schopenhauer’s is encapsulated in Nietzsche’s maxim, ‘man is
something to be overcome.’

*

Nietzschean atheology is relentless antihumanism, which has led to
it being confused with another (quasi-)antihumanistic philosophy:
the ‘deconstruction’ of Jacques Derrida, a philosopher who has
exercised a hegemonic power over Bataille-reception in recent
years. The immediate roots of deconstruction lie in the phenomenol-
ogy of Husserl and Heidegger, and with the later work of
Heidegger, in particular, it has an almost total intimacy. The
dominant motif of this entire current of thought is ‘presencing’, or
Anwesenheit, the event through which the phenomenon is given,
associated with the operation of language. The axial insight of the
later Heidegger and then Derrida — an insight that displaces
Kant’s critique whilst remaining structurally analogous to it — is
that presencing has been traditionally conceived on the model of
presence. This is to say, the origin of the phenomenon has been
conceived on the basis of the phenomenon itself, so that presencing
is thought through that which it constitutes, or, as both Heidegger
and Derrida come to conclude, fails to constitute. Derrida’s well-
known terms ‘writing’, ‘text’, ‘differance’, etc., refer to a process of
the constitution of presence that is never consummated, an
interminable generative non-presence. He often describes this
process in terms that echo, in an anaemic fashion, Nietzsche’s will-
to-power; an insatiable creative drive, perpetually dissolving its
products back into itself in an artistic frenzy without end. But such
resonances do not indicate any substantive philosophical relation.
The phenomenological tradition, with its fetish of awareness, is
quite alien to the philosophies of the energetic unconscious that
flow in a tightly compacted series from Kant, through Schopen-
hauer and Nietzsche, to Freud. There is an immense gulf between
Nietzsche’s aggressive genealogies that wreck unity on zero, and
Derrida’s deconstructed phenomenology that interminably probes
the border between presence and absence.

Deconstructive readings are undertaken almost exclusively




The death of sound philosophy’ 17


against the most elementary structures of signification; the binary
distinction. Such readings focus upon a text whose conceptual
architecture is of this dichotomous or oppositional kind, the claim
being that this is in any case an ubiquitous characteristic of
Western writing. The binary order of the concept is considered to
be the ultimate basis of the myth of phenomenality; the imposition
of a spurious clarity, distinctness, and coherence whose principle is
the logical law of the excluded middle. For Derrida, in superficial
agreement with Hegel’s phenomenology of reason, identity and
negation are both modes of presence. Derrida’s twist is to suggest
that the excluded middle, or the difference between identity and
non-identity, is never successfully excluded, but is rather subject to
a failed repression. The reason for this, to outline it very sketchily,
rests on a principle shared by thinkers as various as Spinoza,
Hegel, and Saussure, that presence is a contrastive concept. To be
present is to have been rigorously differentiated from non-presence,
which means that differentiation itself - since it is the condition of
presence - is unpresentable. Since difference or non-presence
cannot be lucidly represented it is impossible for anything to be
rigorously distinguished from it, which means that the conditions
of presence are unrealizable. The task of deconstructive reading is
the recovery of the written difference, which Derrida calls the trace,
and which interferes with the constitution of identity and difference
as lucid concepts. The procedure of deconstruction is to first
reverse the traditional value hierarchy encrusted in the opposition
of terms, and then to explicitly mark a third term, one that has
been deployed within the text inconsistently. This third term
derives its value from both sides of the opposition; operating as a
partially concealed pseudo-concept with incoherent predicates.
This term will be a name for presencing or writing, and its
discovery consummates a given deconstruction.

Although Derrida’s work can be rather baffling at first,
especially since his prose style has inherited a considerable dosage
of Teutonic inelegance and obscurity, the implications of his
machinery of reading for Nietzsche’s atheological programme are
quite straightforward. He considers atheism to be at best a tactical
step on the way to the deconstruction of theology, and in effect
even this is a step he seems uninterested in. But even if Derrida
were subject to an anti-theistic inclination he could only be driven
by his ‘philosophy’ to search for that which institutes the difference
between the presence and absence of God, something like



1 8 The thirst for annihilation


Schelling’s ‘Absolute’ or Heidegger’s ‘Being’, a search which is
scarcely distinguishable from moves long familiar to radical
theologians. Heidegger himself saw no contradiction between such
a position and a continuing adherence to what is perhaps the most
ideologically compromised variant of Christian belief, southern
German Roman Catholicism.

Before examining Nietzsche’s irreducibility to deconstruction a
little more carefully, it is worth briefly introducing the arguments
of Jean-Fran$ois Lyotard, who even in his early ‘Nietzschean’ stage
is caught up in a quasi-deconstructionist position on the question
of atheism. There is no doubt that during the period ending in
1974 with Economie libidinale Lyotard is far closer to Nietzsche’s
thought than Derrida has ever been, a symptom of which is
Lyotard’s attachment to psychoanalytical rather than phenomeno-
logical modes of enquiry. Nevertheless, even at this stage of his
work, Lyotard disavows the space of atheism with a finality easily
comparable with Derrida’s. He considers atheism to be reactive,
repeating a gesture of negation that belongs to theology rather than
to the impulsions of an energetic unconscious which, as Freud
argues, knows no negativity. What Nietzschean thought requires,
he suggests, is a disinvestment of monotheism and not a critique of
it. Christianity should not be attacked but abandoned, since
atheism merely perpetuates the memory traces that foster the
depressive states of ressentiment and disgust. Lyotard seeks to
persuade his readers that the thought of the death of God merely
dampens libidinal intensities if it is treated as anything other than
a matter of indifference. God should bore us into forgetting rather
than provoking us into revolt.

What Derrida and Lyotard share, and where they both diverge
from Nietzsche, is the supposition that atheism is an instance of
negation, rather than a transmutation or transvaluation of its
sense. For Nietzsche it is facile to accuse atheism of having a
recourse to a notion of negativity which is itself essentially
theological, because to do so is to remain passively within a socio-
historically realized theological space that continues to organize the
meanings of all terms. Negation is re-forged in the celebration of
the death of God, to mean the way in which God is not, and this is
a sense which is incommensurate with the negation that was
permitted within theology and the metaphysics conditioned by it.
To say ‘there is no God’ is not to express a proposition in a pre-
established logical syntax, but to begin thinking again, in a way




The death of sound philosophy’ 19


that is radically new, and therefore utterly experimental. Zero is
fatally discovered beneath the scabrous crust of logical negativity.
It is obscurantism of the most tediously familiar kind to suggest
that the ‘nothing’ of nihilism is an indissolubly theological concept.
The nihil is not a concept at all, but rather immensity and fate.
Nietzsche describes atheism as an open horizon, as a loss of
inhibition. The ‘a-’ of atheism is privative only in the sense of a
collapsing dam.

Deconstruction is the systematic closure of the negative within
its logico-structural sense. All uses, references, connotations of the
negative are referred back to a bilateral opposition as if to an
inescapable destination, so that every ‘de-’, ‘un-’, ‘dis-’, or ‘anti-’ is
speculatively imprisoned within the mirror space of the concept. If
we were to follow deconstruction to the letter here it would follow
that atheism, antihumanism, and antilogic, far from being virulent
pestilential swamps, had no force except through their determinate
relations to their enemies, which had thus always already
bilateralized them into docility. As for deconstruction ‘itself’, ah, it
likes to suffer!

Such logicization of the negative leads to Derrida ‘thinking’ loss
as irreducible suspension, delay, or differance, in which decision is
paralysed between the postponement of an identity and its
replacement. Suspension does not resolve itself into annihilation,
but only into a trace or remnant that has always been distanced
from plenitude (rather than deriving from it), so that differance is
only loss in the (non)sense of irreparable expenditure insofar as
this can be described as the insistence of an unapproachable
possibility, which is to say, under the aegis of a fundamental
domestication. In Freud and the Scene of Writing Derrida is overt in
his commensuration of differance with the reality principle, reading
both as instances of the regulation of discharges. Differance
channels the descent of affective quanta, re-routing them into a
detour (which has always already begun) in order that their efflux
can be adapted to the exigency of repetition. In a peculiar series of
moves Derrida brands desire with a metaphysical inclination
(shifting it from an energetic to a phenomenological register),
which then allows him to transcendentalize repression by aligning
it with the impossibility of pure presence, and to implicitly juggle
the thought of repression so that it becomes the repression of the
acknowledgement of the necessity of repression (repression of




20 The thirst for annihilation


writing-as-repression-of-impossible-inclination) 4 . Thus he re-
doubles the epistemo-contemplative terms of diagnosis, valorizes
the martyrdom of the ego, changes the signs of psychoanalysis
whilst reinforcing its secondary-process politics, attempts the
elimination of all possible reference to a material, sacrificial, and
generative unconscious that is beyond phenomenological recupera-
tion, and, in general, produces one of the most coherent apologetics
of libidinal vivisection ever written, all garbed in a spuriously
subversive rhetoric.

In terms of the social dissemination of his discourse Derrida is
perhaps our Hegel; an assimilator in the service of ‘the great
tradition’ of authoritarian reason and toothless academic profes-
sionalism (facilitated by the sophistication of problems into the
philosophical stratosphere). Like Hegel he is obsessed by the
reference of all things to the concept, by oppositional relations
(both profess to resist, re-direct, struggle against them), representa-
tion, dependency, the saturating prevalence of logos, and capture.
Their thinking also shares the unattractive characteristic of
thriving upon the frustration of rupture and the sentimental pathos
of overwhelming inheritance. Both conceive and practise ‘revolt’ as
a strategy of intelligent conservation. Both write in a ghoulish
technical jargon squirming within a tortured syntax. Indeed, the
most basic lesson Derrida learns from Heidegger - almost certainly
unconsciously — is how to save the socio-political prestige which
Hegel attains for philosophy (the reserve of secondary-process
apologetic) from the ludicrously over-emphatic idealism of specula-
tive thought. The strategy adopted in both cases is essentially
Kantian; if there is something you want to protect, attack it with
measured vigour yourself, thus investing it with replenished force,
and pre-empting its annihilation. If it is Heidegger who is the most
successful practitioner of such conquest as the transfer of defensive
responsibility, Derrida still remains his most eager disciple. Thus it is
that the ‘text of Western metaphysics’ finds itself subject to a
general ‘destruction’, ‘deconstruction’, or restorative critique,
which - amongst other things - fabricates ‘it’ into a totality,
rescues it from its own decrepit self-legitimations, generalizes its
effects across other texts, reinforces its institutional reproduction,
solidifies its monopolistic relation to truth, confirms all but the
most preposterous narratives of. its teleological dignity, nourishes
its hierophantic power of intimidation, smothers its real enemies
beneath a blizzard of pseudo-irritations (its ‘unsaid’ or ‘margins’),




The death of sound philosophy’ 21


keeps its political prisoners locked up, repeats its lobotomizing
stylistic traits and sociological complacency, and, in the end,
begins to mutter once more about an unnamable God. Deconstruc-
tion is like capital; managed and reluctant change.

An important instance of pseudo-contact is found in Derrida’s
discussion of Nietzsche and femininity in Spurs — a text that serves
as a supplement to Heidegger’s interpretation of The Will to Power
as Art. This reading marks out some traits of Nietzsche’s sexuality,
a sexuality of and as writing, indicating a web of relations to the
history and structure of logocentric metaphysics. The condensation
of these remarks into a pointed proposition, a stylate form that is
more frequent in Derrida’s texts than many of his commentators
imply, might generate something like this:

Nietzsche’s textuality is worked by a repressed lesbian stratum

that subverts the traditional logic of truth and appearance.

According to Derrida the system of repression that partially
dominates Nietzsche’s writing is orchestrated by a principle of
castration, having two moments, articulated as follows:

1 He was, he dreaded this castrated woman.

2 He was, he dreaded this castrating woman [Spu 101].

Castration is determined in thought as a plenitude threatened by
absence, of a plus and minus distributed by the law of the excluded
middle. It is thus the fundamental psychological repercussion of
metaphysics. Freud suggests in many places that it is this
structure, structure itself in its purest state, that has governed the
construction of gender within Western history. Because castration
is a matter of the distribution of a moment of pure and ultimate
lack it is readily associated with a problematic of disappropriation.
Derrida reads this difference between having and not-having as
itself regulated by a more primordial propriative movement that
cannot be characterized either by plenitude or lack. He takes this
propriative difference to be a moment of deconstructive lesbian
excess that he expresses in the phrase: ‘He was, he loved this
affirming woman’ [Spu 101]. In Nietzsche’s text — as the unstable
principle of its unfurling — can be found the figure of woman in love
with herself.

The ‘logic’ of these movements closely parallels that of
Heidegger’s The Will to Power as Art lectures, for which the collapse
of the truth/appearance opposition at the end of Nietzsche’s How




22 The thirst for annihilation


the True World at Last Became a Fable is celebrated as the breakdown
of a repressive and unreformable dyadic scheme - a Herausdrehen, a
twisting-out or writhing-free of metaphysics. Derrida somewhat
surreptitiously inserts a figure of lesbian desire into this proble-
matic - against the grain of the ponderous masculinity of
Heideggerian prose - in order to mark the auto-affection of non-
identity, or the asymmetric other of the Phallus in touch with her
(non)self.

The compromises that box-in this intervention are legion, since
once again it is a difference between presence and absence that
finally orchestrates it. That it retains a certain seductiveness stems
from the fact that it partially captures a shift from bilateral
reflection to unilateral propulsion that is profoundly consonant
with Nietzsche’s thinking, even though this shift is crushed into the
border-zone at the edge of a phenomenological determination of
plenitude. Zero or the sacred is retained within the constriction of
profane negativity, and religious fate is interpreted through the
technical prowess of philosophy.

*

At the end of a note from the late spring of 1888, numbered 81 1 in
the compilation entitled ‘The Will to Power’, Nietzsche argues that
a woman’s aesthetics, biased towards the question of receptivity,
have dominated our understanding of art. He suggests that one
should not demand of the artist, who gives, that he becomes a woman,
and receives. The production of art is characterized as masculine,
whilst the reception of art, including the entire history of aesthetics,
and even philosophy as a whole, is allotted to the feminine. Even
though this unstable construction is a blatant efflorescence out of
repression — since it collapses profligacy onto the polar terms of an
exchange relation (constituting reciprocal or bilateral gender
identities) — it allows us to pursue Nietzsche’s thinking about art
into the inhuman squandering that guides and ruins it.

Nietzsche provides us with some further markers into this abyss
earlier in the same note, where he describes the artistic condition
as follows:

the extreme sharpness of certain senses, so they understand a
quite different sign-language - and create one - the condition
that seems to be a part of many nervous disorders-; extreme
mobility that turns into an extreme urge to communicate; the




The death of sound philosophy' 23


desire to speak on the part of everything that knows how to give
signs-; a need to get rid of oneself, as it were, through signs and
gestures; ability to speak of oneself through a hundred speech
media — an explosive condition. One must first think of this
condition as a compulsion and urge to get rid of the exuberance
of inner tension through muscular activity and movements of all
kinds; then as an involutary co-ordination between this move-
ment and the inner processes (images, thoughts, desires) — as a
kind of automatism of the whole muscular system impelled by
strong stimuli from within-; inability to prevent reaction; the
system of inhibition suspended, as it were [N III 716].

And later:

the compulsion to imitate: an extreme irritability through which
a given model becomes contagious - a state is guessed on the
basis of signs and immediately depicted - An image, rising up
within, immediately turns into a movement of the limbs - a
certain suspension of the will - (Schopenhauer!!!) A kind of
deafness and blindness towards the external world - the realm of
admitted stimuli is rigorously delimited [N III 716],

The artistic process is thus likened to a contagion and a nervous
illness, an explosion of abreactive gestures with their associated
intensities. The inhibition to this outflow collapses, but the
admission of new material is sharply reduced. In other words, the
powers of absorption are suppressed; anorexia is coupled with
logorrhea, or extreme volubility, and art is thought on the basis of
a violent wasting disease.

There is a peculiar economic model at work here, in which a
disequilibrium between expenditure and income is pushed towards
its extreme. From a bourgeois perspective what we are faced with
is the ultimate form of dangerous madness; a process of anti-
accumulation that is totally out of control. There are obvious
difficulties in grasping the possibility of this economy due to the
industrial tendency which denies that it could be basic. Chronic
squandering violates the reciprocity which governs the logics of
both Artistotle and Hegel since it is incompatible with the principle
that determination equals negation, according to which every loss
is correlated with an associated gain. Both Aristotelians and
Hegelians can become competent accountants, accepting the
logical basis of double entry book-keeping (which is why bourgeois




24 The thirst for annihilation


and Marxist economists are so often able to understand each other
very easily). Nietzsche’s remarks, on the contrary, tend to depart
from intelligible human economy from the first.

The demand in The Will to Power as Art that ‘one ought not to
demand of the artist, who gives, that he should become a woman’
[N III 716] evokes an episode from the history of ‘how the true
world at last became a fable’:

Progress of the idea, it becomes more delicate, seductive,
unattainable, it becomes a woman, it becomes Christian [N II
963],

If this conjunction is read as saying ‘it becomes a woman, and
therefore becomes Christian’ we can append much of Nietzsche’s
often ferociously anti-feminine rhetoric to this phrase. For instance,
in another note gathered under the heading of The Will to Power as
Art from about this time, he writes: ‘What pleases all pious women,
old or young? a saint with beautiful legs, still young, still an idiot’
[N III 756]. The problem with such a reading is that Christianity
is an identitarian monotheism, insulated against zero, and a
privileged graveyard of the sacred; burying the vortex of vulvo-
cosmic dissolution beneath the monument of eternal being.
Nietzsche is not trapped at the edge of a deconstruction, oscillating
between presence and absence, but is rather scrabbling at the
secondary-process security of partial unity; fending-off zero with
the detritus of logical negation.

If, as Derrida indicates, the pious woman is Nietzsche’s synonym
for the castrato, we can see that this figure is the opposite of the
artist within a heavily revised delirium of wastage. A castrate
capital that can only gorge itself and accumulate opposes the
delirious anorexic maniac who throws away everything he has. But
here we are back to reciprocal determination and double-entry
book-keeping; the condition of impossibility for art, in other words
absolute capitalism. Castration distils a pure piety of engorgement
that drives the artist into a proletarian destitution.

Nietzsche is not unaware of this predicament, and in the passage
that immediately precedes ‘How the true world at last became a
fable’ in Twilight of the Idols he writes:

To separate the world into the ‘true’ and the ‘apparent’, be it in
the Christian fashion, or in that of Kant (a cunning Christian to
the end) is only a suggestion of decadence - a symptom of




The death of sound philosophy’ 25


declining life . . . That the artist treasures appearance above
reality is no objection to this proposition. Because here,
‘appearance’ means reality once again, only selected, strengthened,
corrected. . . [N II 961].

The story traced by ‘How the true world at last became a fable’ is
that of our history, but it is a superficial process when compared to
the pre-history that provides its resources and genealogical sense.
The pre-historical narrative leads up to the events which the
historical narrative presupposes, the suppression of the Dionysian
impulse and its spontaneous flow of unredeemed expenditure into a
rationality of conservation and opposition. This dawning of history
is traced more fully in the note numbered #584 in The Will to
Power, a text of sustained power, including this one small
fragment:

And behold, suddenly the world fell apart into a ‘true’ world and
an ‘apparent’ world: and precisely the world that man’s reason
had devised for him to live and settle in was discredited. Instead
of employing the forms as a tool for making the world
manageable and calculable, the deranged acuity of philosophers
divined that in these categories is presented the concept of the
world to which the one in which man lives does not correspond -
the means were misunderstood as measures of value, even as a
condemnation of their real intention — The intention was to
deceive oneself in a useful way; the means, the invention of
formulas and signs by means of which one could reduce the
confusing multiplicity to a purposive and manageable schema [N
III 726-7],

Where accumulative reason has instituted ‘truth’ and ‘appearance’
as unsurpassable finalities or pure concepts, the artist understands
appearance as reality ‘once again’ (noch einmal ). Reality returns in
appearance like the ripple of a shock-wave; opening wider and
wider domains for migration. Since reality is itself the stimulus for
such migrations they will become progressively more devastating,
as this stimulus becomes progressively ‘selected, strengthened,
corrected’ or, to abbreviate, ‘intensified’. Here at last - where
nothing is last - is the convulsion of zero, eternal recurrence, the
libidinal motor of Nietzsche’s economics.

Nietzsche’s economy of the artistic process, or Dionysian
economy, is built beneath the Vesuvian antilogic of eternal




26 The thirst for annihilation


recurrence. Such an economy is a perpetual re-emergence of
inhuman squandering; an inappropriable excess messily exhibited
in the transfiguration of negation into profligate zero. It is intrinsic
to desire that it always has fresh and - when unmutilated by
repression - increasingly sophisticated constructions to waste. A
Dionysian economy is, indeed, a slash and burn agriculture of solar
stock, in which the negative limit of each conceptual dyad is
reconstituted as an intensification of the positive; as an increasing
virulence of difference. The delirium of squandering flows from this
inevitability that logical negation never arrives, even though zero
impacts. In other words, the thought of eternal recurrence is this:
that the abolition of integrated being in the process of desire, or
unconstrained wastage, corresponds to an intensification of plague
and not a (logically intelligible) negation of assets. Epidemic
difference is only enhanced by the spasmodic aberration from itself.

A Dionysian economy is the flux of impersonal desire,
perpetually re-energized in the pulse of recurrence, in the upsurge
of new realities. These resurgent waves of intensity are situated at
the ‘point’ which patriarchal productivism had reserved for its
limit; at the end of each becoming a woman (which are
misconstrued as specific negations). Desire could thus be said to be
nothing but becoming a woman at different levels of intensity,
although of course, it is always possible to become a pious woman,
to begin a history, love masculinity, and accumulate, because to
become a woman is to depart from reality, and no one loves fables
more than the church. But reality drifts upon zero, and can be
abandoned over and over again. In the lesbian depths of the
unconscious, desires for/as feminizing spasms of remigration are
without limit.

Everything populating the desolate wastes of the unconscious is
lesbian; difference sprawled upon zero, multiplicity strewn across
positive vulvic space. Masculinity is nothing but a shoddy bunk-
hole from death. Socio-historically phallus and castration might be
serious enough, but cosmologically they merely distract from zero;
staking out a meticulously constructed poverty and organizing its
logical displacement. If deconstruction spent less time playing with
its willy maybe it could cross the line . . .




Chapter 2


The curse of the sun


It is the green parts of the plants of the solid earth and the seas
which endlessly operate the appropriation of an important part
of the sun’s luminous energy. It is in this way that light - the sun
- produces us, animates us, and engenders our excess. This
excess, this animation are the effect of the light (we are basically
nothing but an efTect of the sun) [VII 10].

The solar ray that we are recovers in the end its nature and the
sense of the sun: it is necessary that it gives itself, loses itself
without reckoning [VII 10].

The peoples of ancient Mexico united man with the glory of the
universe: the sun was the fruit of a sacrificial madness . . . [VII
192],

There is no philosophical story more famous than that narrated in
the Seventh Book of Plato’s Republic, in which Socrates tells
Glaucon of a peculiar dream. It begins in the depths of a ‘sort of
subterranean cavern’ [PCD 747], in which fettered humans are
buried from the sun, their heads constrained, to prevent them
seeing anything but shadows cast upon a wall by a fire. The ascent
through various levels of illusion to the naked light of the sun is the
most powerful myth of the philosophical project, but it is also the
account of a political struggle, in which Socrates anticipates his
death. The denizens of the cave violently defend their own
benightedness, to such an extent that Socrates asks: ‘if it were
possible to lay hands on and to kill the man who tried to release
them and lead them up, would they not kill him?’ [PCD 749].
Glaucon immediately concurs with this suggestion. Such violence is
not unilateral. The philosopher, after all, has an interest in the sun
that is not purely a matter of knowledge. To have witnessed the





28 The thirst for annihilation


sun is a gain and an entitlement; a supra-terrestrial invitation
(however reluctantly accepted) to rule:

So our cities will be governed by us and you with waking minds,
and not, as most cities now which are inhabited and ruled darkly
as in a dream by men who fight one another for shadows and
wrangle for office as if that were a great good, when the truth is
that the city in which those who are to rule are least eager to
hold office must needs be best administered and most free from
dissension, and the state that gets the contrary type of ruler will
be the opposite of this [PCD 752],

Light, desire, and politics are tangled together in this story;
knotted in the darkness. For there is still something Promethean
about Socrates; an attempt to extract power from the sun. (Bataille
says: ‘The eagle is at one and the same time the animal of Zeus
and that of Prometheus, which is to say that Prometheus is himself
an eagle (Atheus-Prometheus), going to steal fire from heaven’ [II
40].)

To gaze upon the sun directly, without the intervention of
screens, reflections, or metaphors - ‘to look upon the sun itself and
see its true nature, not by reflections in water or phantasms of it in
an alien setting, but in and by itself in its own place’ [PCD 748] -
has been the European aspiration most relentlessly harmonized
with the valorization of truth. Any aspiration or wish is the
reconstruction of a desire (drive) at the level of representation, but
the longing for unimpeded vision of the sun is something more; a
teleological consolidation of representation as such. The sun is the
pure illumination that would be simultaneous with truth, the
perfect solidarity of knowing with the real, the identity of
exteriority and its manifestation. To contemplate the sun would be
the definitive confirmation of enlightenment.

Gazing into the golden rage of the sun shreds vision into scraps
of light and darkness. A white sun is congealed from patches of
light, floating ephemerally at the edge of blindness. This is the
illuminating sun, giving what we can keep, the sun whose
outpourings are acquired by the body as nutrition, and by the eye
as (assimilable) sensation. Plato’s sun is of this kind; a distilled
sun, a sun which is the very essence of purity, the metaphor of
beauty, truth, and goodness. Throughout the cold months, when
nature seems to wither and retreat, one awaits the return of this
sun in its full radiance. The bounty of the autumn seems to pay




The curse of the sun 29


homage to it, as the ancients also did. Mixed with this nourishing
radiance, as its very heart, is the other sun, the deeper one, dark
and contagious, provoking a howl from Bataille: ‘the sun is black’
[III 75]. From this second sun - the sun of malediction - we
receive not illumination but disease, for whatever it squanders on
us we are fated to squander in turn. The sensations we drink from
the black sun afflict us as ruinous passion, skewering our senses
upon the drive to waste ourselves. If ‘in the final analysis the sun is
the sole object of literary description’ [II 140] this is due less to its
illuminative radiance than to its virulence, to the unassimilable
‘fact’ that ‘the sun is nothing but death’ [III 81]. How far from
Socrates — and his hopes of gain — are Bataille’s words: ‘the
sickness of being vomits a black sun of spittle’ [IV 15].

In order to succeed in describing the notion of the sun in the
spirit of one who must necessarily emasculate it in consequence
of the incapacity of the eyes, one must say that this sun has
poetically the sense of mathematical serenity and the elevation of
the spirit. In contrast if, despite everything, one fixes upon it
with sufficient obstinacy, it supposes a certain madness and the
notion changes its sense because, in the light, it is not production
that appears, but refuse [le dechet], which is to say combustion,
well enough expressed, psychologically, by the horror which is
released from an incandescent arc-light [I 231],

Incandescence is not enlightening, but the indelicate philosophical
instrument of ‘presence’ has atrophied our eyes to such an extent
that the dense materiality of light scarcely impinges on our
intelligence. Even Plato acknowledges that the impact of light is (at
first) pain, because of ‘the dazzle and glitter of the light’ [PCD
748]. Phenomenology has systematically erased even this conces-
sion. Yet it is far from obvious why an absence/presence opposition
should be thought the most appropriate grid for registering the
impact of intense radiation. It is as if we were still ancient
Hellenes, interpreting vision as an outward movement of percep-
tion, rather than as a subtilized retinal wounding, inflicted by
exogenous energies.


*


Everything begins for us with the sun, because (we shall come to
see) even the cavern, the labyrinth, has been spawned by it. In a




30 The thirst for annihilation


sense the origin is light, but this must be thought carefully. Our
bodies have sucked upon the sun long before we open our eyes, just
as our eyes are congealed droplets of the sun before copulating with
its outpourings. The flow of dependency is quite ‘clear’ (lethal):
‘The afflux of solar energy at a critical point of its consequences is
humanity’ [VII 14]. The eye is not an origin, but an expenditure.

The first text in the Oeuvres Completes is Bataille’s earliest
published book: The Story of the Eye. It first appeared — under the
pseudonym of Lord Auch — in 1928, which roughly places it
amongst a group of early writings including The Solar Anus (1931),
Rotten Sun (1930, quoted above), and the posthumously published
The Pineal Eye (manuscripts dated variously 1927 and 1931). The
common theme of these writings is the submission of vision to a
solar trajectory that escapes it, dashing representational discourse
upon a darkness that is inextricable from its own historical
aspiration.

The Story [ Histoire ] of the Eye is both the story and the history of
the eye, as also The Pineal Eye is a fiction and a history. Every
history is a story, which does not mean that the story escapes
history, or is anything other than history consummating itself in a
blindness which occupies the place of its proper representation. The
Story of the Eye climaxes with the excision of a priest’s eye, which is
‘made to slip’ [glisser] into the vulva of the book’s ‘heroine’ Simone,
once by her own hand, and once by that of Sir Edmond (an
English roue). In this way the dark thirst which is the subterranean
drive of the sun obliterates vision, drinking it down into the
nocturnal labyrinth of the flesh.

Similarly, in The Pineal Eye, the opening of ‘an eye especially for
the sun’ - appropriate to its ferocious apex at noon - invites an
obliteration; blinding and shattering descent. The truth of the sun
at the peak of its prodigal glory is the necessity of useless waste, where
the celestial and the base conspire in the eclipse of rational
moderation. By concluding the movement of ascent that is
synonymous with humanity, and providing vision with the
verticality that is its due, the pineal eye crowns the epoch of
reason; opening directly onto the heavens (where it is instan-
taneously enucleated by the deluge of searing filth which is the
sun’s truth):

I represented the eye at the summit of the skull to myself as a

horrible volcano in eruption, with exactly the murky and comic




The curse of the sun 31


character which attaches to the rear and its excretions. But the
eye is without doubt the symbol of the dazzling sun, and the one
I imagined at the summit of my skull was necessarily inflamed,
being dedicated to the contemplation of the sun at its maximum
burst [eclat] [II 14],

The fecal eye of the sun is also torn from its volcanic entrails and
the pain of a man who tears out his own eyes with his fingers is
no more absurd than that anal setting of the sun [II 28].

The perfect identity between representation and its object - ‘blind
sun or blinding sun, it matters little’ [II 14] — is thought
consistently in these early texts as the direct gaze; an Icarian
collapse into the sun which consummates apprehension only by
translating it into the register of the intolerable. In the copulation
with the sun — which is no more a gratification than a
representation — subject and object fuse at the level of their
profound consistency, exhibiting (in blindness) that they were
never what they were.

The unconscious — like time - is oblivious to contradiction, as
Freud argues. There is only the primary process (Bataille’s sun),
except from the optic of the secondary process (representation)
which - at the level of the primary process - is still the primary
process. This is a logically unmanageable dazzling, quite useless
from the perspective of reason, which seeks to differentiate action
on the basis of reality. This libidinal consistency, which is (must
be) alogically the same as the sun, is the thread of Ariadne, tangled
in the labyrinth of impure difference. At the beginning of The Solar
Anus Bataille notes that:

Ever since phrases have circulated in brains absorbed in thought,
a total identification has been produced, since each phrase
connects one thing to another by means of copulas ; and it would
all be visibly connected if one could discover in a single glance
the line, in all its entirety, left by Ariadne’s thread, leading
thought through its own labyrinth [I 81].

All human endeavour is built upon the sun, in the same way that a
dam is built upon a river, but that there could be a solar society in
a stronger sense - a society whose gaze was fixed upon the death-
core of the sun - seems at first to be an impossibility. Is it not the
precise negation of sociality to respond to the ‘will for glory [that]




32 The thirst for annihilation


exists in us which would that we live like suns, squandering our goods
and our life' [VII 193]? Without doubt any closed social system
would obliterate itself if it migrated too far into the searing heart of
its solar agitation, unpicking the primary repression of its
foundation. It is nevertheless possible for a society to persist at the
measure of the sun, on condition that a basic aggressivity displaces
its sumptuary furore from itself, so that it washes against its
neighbours as an incendiary rage. It is such a tendency that
Bataille discovers in the civilization of the Aztecs, whose sacrificial
order was perpetuated by means of military violence. In The
Accursed Share - his great work of solar sociology - he remarks of the
Aztecs that:

The priests killed their victims upon the top of pyramids. They
laid them on a stone altar and stabbed them in the chest with an
obsidian knife. They tore out the heart — still beating — and lifted
it up to the sun. Most of the victims were prisoners of war,
justifying the idea that wars were necessary to the life of the sun:
wars having the sense of consumption, not that of conquest, and
the Mexicans thought that, if they ceased, the sun would cease to
blaze [VII 55],

What unfolds beneath Bataille’s scrutiny cannot be an apology for
the Aztecs or even an explanation. What is at stake in his reading
of their culture is an economic intimacy, or thread of solar
complicity, the pursuit of genealogical lineages that weave all
societies onto the savage root-stock of the stars. The raw energy
that stabbed the Aztecs into their ferocities is also that which -
regulated by the apparatus of an accumulative culture - drives
Bataille in his researches. The energetic trajectory that transects
and gnaws his entrails is the molten terrain of a dark communion,
binding him to everything that has ever convulsed upon the Earth.

It is precisely the senseless horror of Aztec civilization that gives
it a peculiar universality; expressing as it does the unavowable
source of social impetus. ‘The sun itself was to their eyes the
expression of sacrifice’ [VII 52], and their energies were dedicated
to a carnage without purpose, whereby they realized the truth of
the sun upon the earth. It seems to Western eyes as though their
hunger for blood were indefensible, based upon ludicrous myths,
and exemplifying at the extreme a human capacity to be perverted
by untruth. If the culture of the Aztecs had been rooted in an
arbitrary mythological vision such a reading might be sustained,




The curse of the sun 33


but for Bataille the thirst for annihilation is the same as the sun. It
is not a desire which man directs towards the sun, but the solar
trajectory itself, the sun as the unconscious subject of terrestrial
history. It is only because of this unsurpassable dominion of the
sun that ‘[f]or the common and uncultivated consciousness the sun
is the image of glory. The sun radiates: glory is represented as
similarly luminous, and radiating’ [VII 189], such that ‘the
analogy of a sacrificial death in the flames to the solar burst is the
response of man to the splendour of the universe’ [VII 193], since
‘human sacrifice is the acute moment of a contest opposing to the
real order and duration the movement of a violence without
measure’ [VII 317],

Belonging alongside ‘sacrifice’ in Bataille’s work is the word
‘expenditure’, depense. This word operates in a network of thought
that he describes as general or solar economy: the economics of
excess, outlined most fully in the same shaggy and beautiful
‘theoretical’ work - The Accursed Share - in which he writes: ‘the
radiation of the sun is distinguished by its unilateral character: it
loses itself without reckoning, without counterpart. Solar economy is founded
upon this principle’ [VII 10]. It is because the sun squanders itself
upon us without return that ‘The sum of energy produced is always
superior to that which was necessary to its production’ [VII 9]
since ‘we are ultimately nothing but an effect of the sun’ [VII 10].
Excess or surplus always precedes production, work, seriousness,
exchange, and lack. Need is never given, it must be. constructed out
of luxuriance. The primordial task of life is not to produce or
survive, but to consume the clogging floods of riches - of energy —
pouring down upon it. He states this boldly in his magnificent line:
‘The world ... is sick with wealth’ [VII 15]. Expenditure, or
sacrificial consumption, is not an appeal, an exchange, or a
negotiation, but an uninhibited wastage that returns energy to its
solar trajectory, releasing it back into the movement of dissipation
that the terrestrial system — culminating in restricted human
economies - momentarily arrests. Voluptuary destruction is the
only end of energy, a process of liquidation that can be suspended
by the acumulative efforts whose zenith form is that of the
capitalist bourgeoisie, but only for a while. For solar economy
‘[e]xcess is the incontestable point of departure’ [VII 12], and
excess must, in the end, be spent.

The momentary refusal to participate in the uninhibited flow of
luxuriance is the negative of sovereignty, a servile differance.




34 The thirst for annihilation


postponement of the end. The burning passage of energetic
dissipation is restrained in the interest of something that is taken to
transcend it; a future time, a depredatory class, a moral goal . . .
Energy is put into the service of the future. ‘The end of the
employment of a tool always has the same sense as the employment
of the tool: a utility is assigned to it in its turn - and so on. The
stick digs the earth in order to ensure the growth of a plant, the
plant is cultivated to be eaten, it is eaten to maintain the life of the
one who cultivated it . . . The absurdity of an infinite recursion
alone justifies the equivalent absurdity of a true end, which does
not serve anything’ [VII 298],

*

One consequence of the Occidental obsession with transcendence,
logicized negation, the purity of distinction, and with ‘truth’, is a
physics that is forever pompously asserting that it is on the verge of
completion. The contempt for reality manifested by such pronounce-
ments is unfathomable. What kind of libidinal catastrophe must
have occurred in order for a physicist to smile when he says that
nature’s secrets are almost exhausted? If these comments were not
such obvious examples of megalomaniac derangement, and thus
themselves laughable, it would be impossible to imagine a more
gruesome vision than that of the cosmos stretched out beneath the
impertinently probing fingers of grinning apes. Yet if one looks for
superficiality with sufficient brutal passion, when one is prepared
to pay enough to systematically isolate it, it is scarcely surprising
that one will find a little. This is certainly an achievement of sorts;
one has found a region of stupidity, one has manipulated it, but
this is all. Unfortunately, the delicacy to acknowledge this - as
Newton so eloquently did when he famously compared science to
beach-combing on the shore of an immeasurable ocean (= 0) —
requires a certain minimum of taste, of noblesse.

Physicalistic science is a highly concrete, sophisticated, and
relatively utile philosophy of inertia. Its domain extends to
everything obedient to God (he is dead, yet the clay still trembles).
Within this domain lie many tracts that have momentarily escaped
cultivation; ‘facts of spirit’ for example, along with constellations of
docility of all kinds, but these are not sites of resistance. Science is
queen wherever there is legitimacy; perhaps terra firma as a whole
belongs to her. No one would hastily dispute her rights, but the
ocean is insurrection (and the land - it is whispered - floats).




The curse of the sun 35


Even after the infantile hyperbole of the scientific completion
myth has been set aside, there is still a question concerning the
success of science that remains untouched. It cannot be seriously
doubted that philosophy has been damaged by science, for it has
even come to anticipate its extinction. It has now reached the stage
where it has lost all confidence in its power to know, where envy
has totally replaced parental pride, and where the stylistic
consequences of its bad conscience have devastated its discourse to
the point of illegibility. For at least a century, and perhaps for two,
the major effort of the philosophers has simply been to keep the
scientists out. How much defensiveness, pathetic mimicry, crude
self-deception, crypto-theological obscurantism, and intellectual
poverty is marked by the name of their recent and morbid offspring
die Geisteswissenschaften.

The first and most basic source of this generalized neurosis
amongst the practitioners and dependents of philosophy is their
incomprehension of quite how it was that ‘they’ gave birth to the
sciences. They tend to think that they were always bad scientists, or
at least, immature ones. ‘If only we had been better at maths’ they
mutter under their breath, as they take a mournfully nostalgic
pleasure in the fact that as calculators Newton and Leibniz still
seemed to be ‘neck and neck’.

What is lost to such melancholy is the fact that philosophy does
not relate to science as a prototype, but as a motor. It was the
basic source of investigative libido before being supplanted by the
arms industry, and if science has not yet been completely dissolved
into a process of technical manufacture, the difference is only a flux
of inexplict philosophy. For philosophy is a machine which
transforms the prospect of thought into excitation; a generator.
‘Why is this so hard to see?’ one foolishly asks. The answer quickly
dawns: the scholars.

Scholarship is the subordination of culture to the metrics of
work. It tends inexorably to predictable forms of quantitative
inflation; those that stem directly from an investment in relatively
abstracted productivity. Scholars have an inordinate respect for
long books, and have a terrible rancune against those that attempt to
cheat on them. They cannot bear to imagine that short-cuts are
possible, that specialism is not an inevitability, that learning need
not be stoically endured. They cannot bear writers allegro, and when
they read such texts — and even pretend to revere them - the result
is (this is not a description without generosity) ‘unappetizing’.




36 The thirst for annihilation


Scholars do not write to be read, but to be measured. They want it
to be known that they have worked hard. Thus far has the ethic of
industry come.

*

Curiosity has imperilled itself in its questioning, it has even
harmed itself. That it has not traversed its history triumphantly is
only one of the many certainties that it suffers from. It is all too
obvious that the Russian roulette of the interrogative mode has led
to its near extinction; maimed in the brain by the rigorous slug of
the natural sciences. For the responses it has provoked have
usually lacked even the bitter solace of aporia. To some the world is
beginning to seem a crudely intelligible place; a desert of
simplicity, dotted with the stripped bones of inquisitiveness.

What if curiosity was worth more than comprehension? This is
not such an impossible thought to entertain. Nor is it unreasonable
to ask after the necessity that has led the motor of thought to be
subordinated to its consequences. Resolution could only be desirable
if there existed an interest superseding thought. Otherwise it
should be merely a means, the end of which is the promotion of
enigma and confusion. That thought has to tolerate solutions is
simply an unfortunate necessity. Perhaps not even that.

Curiosity is a desire; a dynamic impulse abolished by petrifica-
tion. It would be an idiocy - although an all too familiar one - to
try to preserve it in the formaldehyde of obscurantism and
mystique. For an eternal mystery is as devastating to curiosity as
any certainty could be. The ideology of thought’s exterminators is
dogmatism, it scarcely matters of which kind.

It is not the ability to preserve riddles that has value, but the
ability to engender them. Any text that persists as an acquisition
after coming to a comfortable end has the character of a leech,
nourishing itself on the blood of problematic, and returning only
repulsive inertia. The fertility of a text, on the contrary, is its
inachievement , its premature termination, its inconclusiveness. Such
a text is always too brief, and instead of a draining anaesthetic
attachment there is the sting.

This book is not of that kind, it slows Bataille down, driving his
fleet madness into a swamp of metaphysics and pseudo-science.
My refusal to surrender the sun to the denizens of observatories -
and the unseemly tussle that results - makes my relation to Bataille
somewhat problematic, wrecking large tracts of my text. My




The curse of the sun 37


relation to scientific knowledge, on the other hand, is nothing less
than a scandal.

What I ofTer is a web of half-choked ravings that vaunts its
incompetence, exploiting the meticulous conceptual fabrications of
positive knowledge as a resource for delirium, appealing only to the
indolent, the maladapted, and the psychologically diseased. I
would like to think that if due to some collective spiritual seism the
natural sciences were to become strictly unintelligible to us, and
were read instead as a poetics of the sacred, the consequence would
resonate with the text that follows. At least disorder grows.

*

Disorder always increases in a closed system (such as the
universe), because nature is indifferent to her composition. The
bedrock state of a system which is in conformity with the chance
distribution of its elements has been called ‘entropy’, a term that
summarizes the conclusions of Carnot, Clausius, and their
successors concerning thermic engines and the science of heat 5 .
With the concept of entropy everything changes. Natural processes
are no longer eternal clockwork machines, they are either extinct
( Warmetod) or tendential. Mechanisms are subordinated to motors;
to thermic difference, energy flux, reservoir, and sump. Order is an
evanescent chance, a deviation from disorder, a disequilibrium.
Negative disorder — negentropy — is an energetic resource, and
chance is the potentiation of the power supply. Macht, puissance, as
potential for the degradation of energy, as the fluidification of
matter/energy, as the possibility of release towards the unregulated
or anarchic abyss into which energy pours, as the death of God.
Upstream and downstream; the reserve and its dissipation. Order
is not law but power, and power is aberration. For Nietzsche, for
Freud, and then for Bataille, this is the background against which
desire is to be thought. The mega-motor.

There is no difference between desire and the sun: sexuality is
not psychological but cosmo-illogical. ‘Sexual activity escapes at
least during a flash from the bogging-down of energy, prolonging
the movement of the sun’ [VII 1 1], A cosmological theory of desire
emerges from the ashes of physicalism. This is to presuppose, of
course, that idealism, spiritualism, dialectical materialism (shoddy
idealism), and similar alternatives have been discarded in a
preliminary and rigorously atheological gesture. Libidinal material-
ism, or the theory of unconditional (non-teleological) desire, is




38 The thirst for annihilation


nothing but a scorch-mark from the expository diagnosis of the
physicalistic prejudice.

The basic problem with physicalistic thinking is easy to
formulate; it remains implicitly theological. Regression to a first
cause is an inescapable consequence of the physicalistic position,
which thus remains bound to the old theological matrix, even after
the throne has been evacuated by a tremulous deicide. The
physicalistic contention is that matter receives its impulsion or
determination from without; through the combination of an
essential lawfulness that transcends the particular entity and the
influence of external bodies or forces. Any ‘intrinsic’ process (such
as decay) results from the expression of natural laws, whilst all
extrinsic process results from the passive communication of an
original cosmic fatality (probabilistic physics makes no essential
difference here, since the mathematical - hence formal and
extrinsic - determination of probability is no less rigorous than that
of causal necessity). Physical matter is therefore unambiguously
passive, exhausted by the dual characteristics of transmitting alien
forces and decaying according to the universally legislated
exigencies of its composition.

There is a sense in which scientific materialism has not yet
begun, because it has not registered the distance between its
representational object and the real matter/energy matrix, insofar
as such materiality is irreducible in principle to the form of the
concept. This irrecoverable other of intellectual prehension can be
designated as ‘chaos’ (order = 0), or, to use a terminology in
harmony with Boltzmann’s thermodynamics, as absolutely improbable
negentropy. Lest it be thought that this is an irresponsible sub-
philosophical notion brought to scientific materialism from with-
out, let me quote a profound fable narrated by Boltzmann (and
attributed to his ‘old assistant, Dr Schuetz’) in his 1895 essay ‘On
certain questions of the theory of gases’:

We assume that the whole universe is, and rests for ever, in
thermal equilibrium. The probability that one (only one) part of
the universe is in a certain state, is the smaller the further this
state is from thermal equilibrium; but this probability is greater,
the greater the universe is. If we assume the universe great
enough we can make the probability of one relatively small part
being in any given state (however far from the thermal
equilibrium), as great as we please. We can also make the




The curse of the sun 39


probability great that, though the whole universe is in thermal

equilibrium, our world is in its present state [B III 543-4],

It should first be noted that the account Boltzmann gives here is
quite possibly the only conceivable physicalistic atheism, at least, if
the second law of thermodynamics is to be maintained. It suggests
that the thermal disequilibrium which constitutes the energetic
positivity (negentropy or ‘H-value’) of our region of the universe
might be not only possible, but even probable, if the universe were
large enough. Thus the reality of negentropy would he adequately
explained probabilistically, without the need for theological
postulates of any kind.

Boltzmann’s account introduces a conceptual differentiation
between probable and improbable negentropy, the latter - were it
to exist — posing an implicit problem for thermodynamics. It is,
indeed, a notion of absolutely improbable negentropy that
Boltzmann quite reasonably attributes to the critics of the second
law, and his speculative cosmology is designed precisely to
demonstrate the reducibility of all regional improbability or deviation
to general probability or equilibrium (statistical lawfulness). General
or absolute improbability would be the character of a universe
whose enigmatic positivity was stastico-physically irresolvable.
This is not to say that the empirical demonstration of absolutely
improbable negentropy could ever disprove general statistical
mechanics, since no level of improbability can be strictly
intolerable to such a perspective. From the perspective of natural
science the re-formulation of cosmology on the basis of a general
chaotics could only be an arbitrary step, with a variable degree of
probabilistic persuasiveness (something suspiciously akin to a
religion).

In his argument with Zermelo 6 , Boltzmann develops the ideas
sketched in the text already cited, although the fundamental
thought remains the same. High H-values or negentropies are
probabilistic aberrations and do not, for this reason, violate any
mechanical law. Boltzmann insists that ‘vanishingly few’ [verschwin-
dend wenig ] cases of high or ascending H-value are to be expected
according to the second law, but that the multiplication of
probability by time (‘t’) can justify any H-value if ‘t’ is given a
high enough value. It is worth expanding upon the concept of time
at work here, since what is at stake is the dynamic of permutation
and not merely an abstract duration, whatever that might be. Even




40 The thirst tor annihilation


the heat-death condition of minimal H-values are still reservoirs of
energy, even though this energy is fully degraded or entropic.
Degraded energy has lost its potential to accomplish work, but
nevertheless remains in a state of restless mutation. The fact that
such mutation is, from a probabilistic perspective, highly unlikely
to register a significant change in H-value, does not mean that it
ceases to run through perpetual permutation. The time function
thus generates a quantitatively definable permutational fecundity
for a constant energy reservoir, i.e. the sum of cosmological
permutation, or potential transformation of H-value, is equal to
energy multiplied by time. The improbability of high H-values can
be expressed as the expected proportion of such values within a
range of permutations of a given magnitude.

Boltzmann writes: ‘In any case, one can arrive again at a large
hump in the H-curve as long as the time of movement is extended
enough, indeed, if this extension is protracted satisfactorily even
the old condition must recur (and obviously in the mathematical
sense this must occur infinitely often, given an infinitely long
duration of movement)’ [B III 569],

It can be argued that when t = °° any possible H-value becomes
probable, and perhaps even necessary. Such an argument actually
depends upon the source of transformation being what is called in
statistical theory ‘ergodic’, which means that it is non-preferential
in relation to possible random occurrences. It does not seem as if
the cosmological rendering of Nietzsche’s eternal recurrence, for
instance, is based upon an ergodic source. But there is no need to
enter into questions about infinity in order to follow Boltzmann’s
argument, since any finite H-value compatible with the physical
limits of the universe becomes probable at a certain finite value ‘t’.
Superficially it might seem as if even this formulation seems to
imply a level of ergodism, since it is conceivable that impoverished
cycles of mechanical repetition repeated indefinitely would allow a
large ‘t’ value whilst excluding the possibility of high H-values.
This argument, an extreme version of Poincare’s 7 , is actually non-
pertinent to Boltzmann’s position, since Boltzmann is seeking to
explain the existence, and the possible repetition, of actual rather
than hypothetical negentropy. More importantly, however, a
narrowly mechanical - rather than probabilistic - explanation for
the reproduction of negentropy would seem to directly violate the
second law, which is based upon a rupturing of the reciprocity
between ascending and descending H-values. In other words, the




The curse of the sun 41


second law requires that it makes more sense to talk about high H-
value humps than ab&ut low H-value troughs, since thermal
equilibrium does not tend to another state.

Boltzmann’s own interpretation of this non-reciprocity takes the
form of a fascinating and somewhat naturalized variant of
Kantianism. He argues that the departure from troughs of thermal
equilibrium occurs in periods of time so extended that they escape
observational techniques and thus do not fulfill the epistemological
conditions of being objects of possible experience. In his words:
‘the length of this period makes a mockery of all observability
[ Beobachtbarkeit ]’ [B III 571]. And: ‘All objections raised against
the mechanical appearance of nature are . . . objectless and rest
upon errors’ [B III 576], Speculation upon natural processes
deviating from the entropic tendency are thus dialectical in a
Kantian sense, whilst only those processes following the entropic
tendency concern legitimate objects of possible experience. On a
pedantic note, it seems to me that Boltzmann is rigorously entitled
only to argue that it is ‘vanishingly improbable’ that a negentropic
process could be observed.

For Kant’s timeless thing-in-itself Boltzmann substitutes vast
stretches of time characterized by maximum entropy or thermal
equilibrium, and thus by minimal H-values, whilst Kant’s
phenomenon is transformed by Boltzmann in order to rest upon an
energetic foundation of negentropy, thermal dis-equilibrium, or
high H-values. Both the ‘phenomenal’ and ‘noumenal’ stretches of
Boltzmann’s cosmological time are characterized by the conserva-
tion of energy and atomic particles, even in an equilibriated state.
Time must be ejected into transcendence, and thought as a pure
form organizing the permutational metamorphosis of elements, in
order for the probabilistic emergence of negentropic humps to be
possible. It is fundamental to Boltzmann’s argument that positive
deviations in H-value are equally possible at any time, time being
an indifferent grid.

Libidinal matter is that which resists a relation of reciprocal
transcendence against time, and departs from the rigorous
passivity of physical substance without recourse to aualistic,
idealistic, or theistic conceptuality. It implies a process of mutation
which is simultaneously devoid of agency and irreducible to the
causal chain. This process has been designated in many ways. I
shall follow Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Freud in provisionally
entitling it ‘drive’ ( Trieb ). Drive is that which explains, rather than




42 The thirst for annihilation


presupposing, the cause/efiect couple of classical physics. It is the
dynamic instituting of effectiveness, and is thus proto-physical.
This implies that drives are the irruptive dynamics of matter in
advance of natural law. The ‘science’ of drives, which has been
named ‘libidinal economy’, is thus foundational for physics, as
Schopenhauer meticulously demonstrates.

A libidinal energetics is not a transformation of intentional
theories of desire, of desire understood as lack, as transcendence, as
dialectic. Such notions are best left to the theologians. It is, rather,
a transformation of thermodynamics, or a struggle over the sense of
‘energy’. For it is in the field of energetic research that the
resources for a materialist theory of desire have been slowly (and
blindly) composed:

1 Chance. Entropy is the core of a probabilistic engine, the
absence of law as an automatic drive. The compositions of
energy are not determinations but differentiations, since all order
flows from improbability. Thus a revolution in the conception of
identities, now derived from chance as a function of differentia-
tion, hence quantitative, non-absolute, impermanent. Energy
pours downstream automatically, ‘guided’ only by chance, and
this is even what ‘work’ now means (freed from its Hegelian
pathos), a function of play, unbinding, becoming.

2 Tendency. The movement from the improbable to the probable
is an automatic directionality; an impulsion. Entropy is not a
telos, since it is not represented, intentionally motivating, or
determinate. It nevertheless allows power, tension, and drive to
be grasped as uni-directional, quantitative, and irresistible
forces. Teleological schemes are no longer necessary to the
understanding of tendential processes, and it is no longer
necessary to be patient with them, they are superfluous.

3 Energy. Everywhere only a quantitative vocabulary. Fresh-air
after two millennia of asphyxiating ontologies. Essences dissolve
into impermanent configurations of energy. ‘Being’ is indistin-
guishable from its effectiveness as the unconscious motor of
temporalization, permutational dynamism. The nature of the
intelligible cosmos is energetic improbability, a differentiation
from entropy.

4 Information. The laborious pieties of the Geisteswissenschafterr,
signs, thoughts, ideologies, cultures, dreams, all of these
suddenly intelligible as natural forces, as negentropies. A whole




The curse of the sun 43


series of pseudo-problems positively collapsed. What is the
relation between mind and body? Is language natural or
conventional? How does an idea correspond to an object? What
articulates passion with conception? All signals are negentropies,
and negentropy is an energetic tendency.

The thermospasm is reality as undilute chaos. It is where we all
came from. The death-drive is the longing to return there (‘it’
itself), just as salmon would return upstream to perish at the
origin. Thermospasm is howl, annihilating intensity, a peak of
improbability. Energetic matter has a tendency, a Todestrieb. The
current scientific sense of this movement is a perpetual degradation
of energy or dissipation of difference. Upstream is the reservoir of
negentropy, uneven distribution, thermic disequilibrium. Down-
stream is Tohu Bohu, statistical disorder, indifference, Warmetod.
The second law of thermodynamics tells us that disorder must
increase, that regional increases in negentropy still imply an
aggregate increase in entropy. Life is able to deviate from death
only because it also propagates it, and the propagation of disorder
is always more successful than the deviation. Degradation ‘profits’
out of life. Any process of organization is necessarily aberrational
within the general economy, a mere complexity or detour in the
inexorable death-flow, a current in the informational motor, energy
cascading downstream, dissipation. There are no closed systems, no
stable codes, no recuperable origins. There is only the thermo-
spasmic shock wave, tendential energy flux, degradation of energy.
A receipt of information - of intensity — carried downstream.

*

Libidinal materialism (Nietzsche) is not, however, a ther-
modynamics. This is because it does not distinguish between power
and energy, or between negentropy and energy. It no longer
conceives the level of entropy as a predicate of any substantial or
subsistent being. In contrast to the energy of physical ther-
modynamics, libidinal energy is chaotic, or pre-ontological. Thus
Nietzsche’s devastating attacks of the notions of ‘being’, ‘thing-in-
itself ’, of a substratum separable from its effects, etc. Where
thermodynamics begins with an ontology of energy, of particles
(Boltzmann), of space/time, and then interprets distributions and
entropy levels as attributes of energy, libidinal materialism accepts
only chaos and composition. ‘Being’ as an effect of the composition




44 The thirst for annihilation


of chaos, of the ‘ approximation of a world of becoming to a world of being’
[N III 895]. With the libidinal reformulation of being as
composition ‘one acquires degrees of being, one loses that which
has being’ [N III 627], The effect of ‘being’ is derivative from
process, ‘because we have to be stable in our beliefs if we are to
prosper, we have made the ‘real’ world a world not of change and
becoming, but one of being’ [N III 556].

The great axes of Nietzsche’s thought trace out the space of a
libidinal energetics. Firstly: a concerted questioning of the logico-
mathematical conception of the same, equal, or identical, die
Gleichheit, which is dissolved into a general energetics of composi-
tions; of types, varieties, species, regularities. The power to
conserve, transmit, circulate, and enhance compositions, the power
that is assimilated in the marking, reserving, and appropriating of
compositions, and the power released in the disinhibition,
dissipation, and Dionysian unleashing of compositions. Beyond
essentializing philosophies lies art, as the irrepressible flux of
compositions, the interchange between excitation and communica-
tion.

Secondly: a figure of eternal recurrence, stretched between a
thermodynamic baseline (Boltzmann’s theory of eternal recur-
rence) and a libidinal summit, a theoretical machine for transmut-
ing ontologico-scientific discoveries into excitations. First the
scientific figure: recurrence as a theory of energetic forces and their
permutation; chance, tendency, energy, and information. In the
play of anarchic combinations and redistributions forces tend to the
exhaustion of their reserve of possible states, inclining to the circle, a
figure of affirmation and intoxication, as well as a teaching,
message, or signal. A ‘sea of forces flowing and rushing together,
eternally changing, eternally flooding back, with tremendous years
of recurrence, with an ebb and a flood of its forms; out of the
simplest forms striving towards the most complex, out of the
stillest, most rigid, coldest forms towards the hottest, most
turbulent, most self-contradictory, and then returning home to the
simple out of this abundance . . . without goal, unless the joy of the
circle is itself a goal; without will, unless a ring feels good will
towards itself- do you want a name for this world?’ [N III 917].
Then the libidinal peak; the recurrence of impetus in the ascent
through compositional strata, always noch einmal, once again, and
never ceiling, horizon, achieved essence: ‘would you be the ebb of
this great flow’ [N II 279],




The curse of the sun 45


Thirdly: a general theory of hierarchies, of order as rank-order
(composition). There are no longer any transcendental limits;
Schopenhauer’s ‘grades of objectification’ are decapitated, thus
depolarized, opened into intensive sequences in both directions.
Kant is defeated, as transcendental/empirical difference is col-
lapsed into the scales (but it takes a long time for such events to
reach us). History returns (what could timelessness mean now?)
‘[T]o speak of oppositions, where there are only gradations and a
multiplicitous delicacy of steps’ [N II 589].

Fourthly: a diagnosis of nihilism, of the hyperbolic of desire.
Recurrence is the return of compositional impetus across the scales,
the insatiability of creative drive. This is ‘Dionysian pessimism’;
the recurrence of stimulus (pain) and the exultation of its
overcoming. For the exhausted ones, the Schlechtweggekommenen, this
is intolerable, for they are stricken with ‘[wjeariness, which would
reach the end with one leap, with a death leap, a poor unknowing
weariness, which would not will once more; it is that which created
all gods and after-worlds’ [N II 298]. Plato first, then Christianity,
feeding on human inertia like a monstrous leech, creating
humanity (the terminal animal). Nihilism completes itself in
principle at once, God is conceived; a final being, a cessation of
becoming, an ultimate thing beyond which nothing can be desired.

*

Freud, too, is an energeticist (although reading Lacan and his
semiological ilk one would never suspect it). He does not conceive
desire as lack, representation, or intention, but as dissipative
energetic flow, inhibited by the damming and channelling
apparatus of the secondary process (domain of the reality
principle). Pleasure does not correspond to the realization of a
goal, it is rather that unpleasure is primary excitation or tension
which is relieved by the equilibriating flux of sexual behaviour
(there is no goal, only zero); ‘unpleasure corresponds to an increase
in the quantity of excitation and pleasure to a diminution’ [F III
218], This compulsion to zero is - notoriously — ambivalent in
Freud’s text: ‘the mental apparatus endeavours to keep the
quantity of excitation present in it as low as possible or at least to
keep it constant’ [F III 219]. Far from being a discrediting
confusion, however, such ambivalence is the exact symptom of
rigorous adherence to the reality of desire; expressing the unilateral
impact of zero within the order of identitarian representation.




46 The thirst for annihilation


Psychoanalysis, as the science of the unconscious, is born in the
determination of that which suffers repression as the consequence
of a transgression against the imperative of survival. It is the
pursuit of this repressed threat to the ego which carries Freud
along the profound arch of thought from sexuality to the death
drive. At first (in the period up to the First World War) the
attempt to explicitly formulate the site of the most irremediable
collision between survival and desire leads Freud to his famous
reading of the Oedipus myth and the sense of the Father’s law,
since it is the competition with the Father - arising as a correlate of
the infant’s incestual longing for the mother - that first brings the
relation between desire and survival to a crisis. Later, in the
formulation of the death drive, the sacrificial character of desire is
thought even more immediately, so that desire is not merely
integrated structurally with a threat to existence within the oedipal
triangle, but is rather related to death by the intrinsic tendency of
its own economy. The intensity of the affect is now thought as
inherently oriented to its own extinction, as a differentiation from
death or the inorganic that is from its beginning a compulsion to
return. But despite recognizing that the conscious self is a
modulation of the drives, so that all psychical energy stems from
the unconscious (from which ego-energy is borrowed), Freud seems
to remain committed to the right of the reality principle, and its
representative the ego, and thus to accept a survival (or
adaptation) imperative as the principle of therapeutic practice. It is
because of this basic prejudice against the claims of desire that
psychoanalysis has always had a tendency to degenerate into a
technology of repression that subtilizes, and therefore reinforces,
the authority of the ego. In the terms both of the reality principle
and the conservative moment of psychoanalysis, desire is a
negative pressure working against the conservation of life, a
dangerous internal onslaught against the self, tending with
inexorable force towards the immolation of the individual and his
civilization.

Metapsychology is solar pyschology. At the heart of Freud’s
Beyond the Pleasure Principle he sketches out his dazzling cosmic
insight:


It would be in contradiction to the conservative nature of the
drives if the goal of life were a state of things which had never




The curse of the sun 47


yet been attained. On the contrary, it must be an old state of
things, an initial state from which the living entity has at one
time or another departed and to which it is striving to return by
the mazings [Umwege] along which its development leads . . . For
a long time, perhaps, living substance was thus being constantly
created afresh and easily dying, till decisive external influences
altered in such a way as to make ever more complicated mazings
[immer komplizierteren Umwegen \ before reaching its aim of death.
These mazings [ Umuiege ] to death, faithfully kept to by the
conservative drives, would thus present us today with the picture
of the phenomena of life [F III 248].

Life is ejected from the energy-blank and smeared as a crust upon
chaotic zero, a mould upon death. This crust is also a maze - a
complex exit back to the energy base-line — and the complexity of
the maze is life trying to escape from out of itself, being nothing but
escape from itself, from which it tries to escape: maze-wanderer.
That is to say, life is itself the maze of its route to death; a tangle of
mazings [ Umwege ] which trace a unilateral deviation from blank.
What is the source of the ‘decisive external influences’ that propel
the mazings of life, if not the sun?

*

The most profound word to emerge from the military history of
recent times is ‘overkill’; a term that registers something from the
infernal core of desire. Superficially it is irrelevant whether one is
killed by a slingshot or by a stupendous quantity of high-explosive,
napalm, and white phosphorous, and in this sense overkill is
merely an economic term signifying an unnecessary wastage of
weaponry. Yet the Vietnam war - in whose scorched soil this word
was germinated — was not merely the culmination of a series of
military and industrial tendencies leading to the quantification of
destructive power on a monetary basis, it was also a decisive point
of intersection between pharmacology and the technology of
violence. Whilst a systematic tendency to overkill meant that
ordnance was wasted on the already charred and blasted corpses of
the Vietnamese, a subterranean displacement of overkill meant
that the demoralized soldiers of America’s conscript army were
‘wasted’ (‘blitzed’, ‘bombed-out’) on heroin, marijuana and LSD.
This intersection implies (as can be traced by a systematic
linguistic ambivalence) that the absolute lack of restraint — even




48 The thirst for annihilation


according to the most cynical criteria - in the burning, dismember-
ment, and general obliteration of life, was the obscure heart of an
introjected craving; of a desire that found its echo in the hyperbolic
dimension of war.

Is it not obvious that the hyper-comprehensive annihilation so
liberally distributed by the US war-machine throughout south-east
Asia became a powerful (if displaced) object of Western envy?
Almost everything that has happened in the mass domains of non-
institutional pharmacology, sexuality, and electric music in the
wake of this conflict attests strongly to such a longing. What is
desired is that one be ‘wiped out’. After the explicit emergence of
an overkill craving, destruction can no longer be referred to any
orthodox determination of the death drive (as Nirvana-principle),
because death is only the base-line from which an exorbitantantly
‘masochistic’ demand departs. Death is to the thirst for overkill
what survival is to a conventional notion of Thanatos: minimal
satiation. Desiring to die, like desiring to breathe, is a hollow
affirmation of the inevitable. It is only with overkill that desire
distances itself from fate sufficiently to generate an intensive
magnitude of excitation. Thus, in Freud’s energetic model of the
nervous-system there are two economies that contribute to
psychical excitation. There is the quantitatively stable energy
reservoir deployed by the psyche in the various investments
constituting its objects of love (including the ego), and there is the
‘general economy’ of traumatic fusion with alterity that floods the
nervous-system with potentially catastrophic quantities of alien
excitation. It was Freud’s recognition of this second economy, and
its role in the genesis of 1914—18 war neuroses (stemming largely
from the effects of continuous and overwhelming artillery barrages)
that was fundamental to the discovery of the death-drive. If such a
traumatic economy is readily susceptible to the thought of overkill,
it is because trauma is consequential upon an open-ended series of
magnitudes within which lethality can be located at an arbitrary
degree.

It is because the second law of thermodynamics proclaims that
entropy always increases in a closed system that life is only able to
augment order locally, within an open system from which disorder
can be ‘exported’. The space in which such localization takes place
is not thematized by thermodynamic models, but treated as one of
their presuppositions. It is implicitly conceived as homogeneous
extension, extrinsic to the distributions which occupy it. Bataille,




The curse of the sun 49


on the contrary, thinks space (rather than assuming it). The base
topic associated with such thinking can be summarized under the
title ‘labyrinth’, and will be investigated in some detail later in this
book. For the moment, however, the issue is a more elementary
one: that of theorizing the relation between the closed field of the
cosmic energy reservoir (0), and the local pool of non-equilibrium
economy, open to exchange.

It is tempting to understand the difference between ‘general’ and
‘restricted’ economy as commensurate with that between ‘closed’
and ‘open’ systems. In both cases the former terms seem to refer to
the total field of energy exchange, and the latter to the
differentiated regions within such a field. A translation of this kind
is not wholly inappropriate, but it simplifies the situation
excessively. That which circulates in an economy of the kind
Bataille describes is less a ‘content’ with a general and a local
intelligibility than the capacity for relative isolation or restriction
as such. There is a sense (that of scientific objectivism) in which
utility presupposes negative entropy, but abstract order of this kind
is quite different from the ‘canalization’ [VII 467] which is utility’s
basic characteristic. The quasi-autonomous territories which
inhibit the concrete universalization of the second thermodynamic
law are not conditions of ‘composition’ as Bataille uses this term,
they are composition as such. In other words, composition is
simultaneous with the real differentiation ‘of’ space.

It is thus that Bataille extracts ‘production’ from the idealist
schemas which continue to operate within Marx’s analysis, those
lending the critique of political economy a marked humanist
tendency. Work is not an origin, sublating divine creation into
historical concretion, but an impersonal potential to exploit
(release) energy. The humanized exploitation of class societies is
not without a prototype, since surplus production is only possible
because of the solar inheritance it pillages. Bataille’s solar
economics is inscribed within the lacuna in Marxism opened by the
absence of a theory of excess, and describes the truly primitive
(impersonal) accumulation of resources. Such cosmic-historical
economy is axiomatized by the formula that ‘ the energy produced is
superior to the energy necessary to its production' [VII 466], and maps out
the main-sequence of terrestrial development, from which the
convulsions of civilization are an aberration.

Strictly speaking, the libidinal main-sequence, impersonal ac-
cumulation, or primary (solar) inhibition, emerges simultaneously




50 The thirst for annihilation


with life, and persists in a more or less naked state up until the
beginning of sedentary agriculture, sometime after the last ice-age.
Life is simply the name we give to the surface-effects of the main-
sequence. Compared to the violently erratic libidinal processes that
follow it, the main-sequence seems remarkably stable. Never-
theless, libido departs from its pre-history only because it has
already become unstable within it, and even though the prepon-
derant part of the main-sequence occurs within a geological time-
span, the evidence of a basic tendency to the geometric acceleration
of the process is unmistakable.

The main-sequence is a burning cycle, which can be understood
as a physico-chemical volatilization of the planetary crust, a
complexification of the energy-cycle, or, more generally, as a
dilation of the solar-economic circuits that compose organic matter,
knitting it into a fabric that includes an ever-increasing proportion
of the (‘inorganic’) energetic and geo-chemical planetary in-
frastructure. Of course, the distinction between the organic and the
inorganic is without final usefulness, because organic matter is only
a name for that fragment of inorganic material that has been
woven into meta-stable regional compositions. If a negative prefix
is to be used, it would be more accurate to place it on the side of
life, since the difference is unilateral, with inorganic matter proving
itself to be non-exclusive, or indifferent to its organization, whereas
life necessarily operates on the basis of selection and filtering
functions.

When colloidal matter enters the main-sequence it begins to
differentiate two tendencies, which Freud characterized at a higher
level with a distinction between ‘cp’ and ‘ip’, or communication and
isolation (immanence/transcendence, death and confusion) 8 . Or-
ganic libido emerges with the gradual differentiation of what seem
superficially to be two groups of drives (Freud does not describe
them as such until later). A progressive tendency isolates or
‘individuates’ the organism, first by nucleation (prokaryotes to
eukaryotes), and then through the isolation of a germ-line, dividing
the protoplasm into ‘generative cells’ and ‘somatic cells’. This is
the archaic form of Freud’s ‘Eros’; on the one hand a tension
between soma and generation, and on the other a conservation of
dissipative forces within an economy of the species, leading
ultimately to sexuality. But this erotic or speciating tendency is
perpetually endangered by a regressive tendency that leads to
dissolution (Thanatos).




The curse of the sun 51


The ‘<p’ or communication tendency accentuates the various
‘interactions’ between biological matter and its ‘outside’, and is
thus equivalent to a lowering of the organic barrier threshold,
essential to photo-reactivity, assimilation, cybernetic regulation,
nutrition, etc. This is the complex of organic functions which
Bataille associates with primary immanence. The ‘ip’ or isolation
tendency is the inhibition of exchange, a raising of the barrier
threshold that generates a measure of invariant stability, the
conservation of code, controlled expenditure of bio-energetic
reserves, etc. The combined operation of these tendencies effects a
selective distribution in the degree of fusion between the organism
and its environment (a difference that is not given but produced),
which precariously stabilizes a level of composition. The maximum
state of <p (qp max ) is equivalent to the complete dissolution of the
organism, at which point its persistence would be a matter of
unrestricted chance, free-floating at the edge of zero. At any other
level of <p the organism sustains a measure of integration, and what
we call ‘the organism’ is only this variable cohesiveness, or
intensity: the real basis of Bataille’s ‘transcendence’; the maze-
fringe of death.

Isolation or transcendence (ip) is an intensive quantity, since it
lacks pre-given extensive co-ordinates. In other words, there is no
logico-mathematical apparatus appropriate to the emergence of tp,
since \p ‘is itself’ the basic measure of identifiability or equivalence.
Communication (q>) escapes both identity and equivalence because
it is indifferentiation or uninhibited flow; the intensive zero,
energy-blank, silence, death. Only differentiation from <p (dtp = tp)
is able to function as a resource, storing energy, and precipitating
compositions (forms, behaviours, signs). The intensive quantity Tp
is therefore the basis and currency of extensive accumulation.

Bataille’s economics is based on the principle that extensive
exchange (ipi — * \p 2 ) is primitively accumulative. The extensive
exchange is comprised of two intensive transitions: an expenditure
(ip — » tp) and an acquisition (<p — * ip), with the latter always
exceeding the requirement of replacement, so that ipi < ip 2 .
Bataille’s emphasis on this point leaves little room for misun-
derstanding: ‘the energy that the plant appropriates to its mode of life is
superior to the energy strictly necessary to that mode of life' [VII 466], ‘the
appropriated energy produced by its life is superior to the energy strictly
necessary to its life’ [VII 466]. ‘It is of the essence of life to produce
more energy than that expended in order to live. In other words,




52 The thirst for annihilation


the biochemical processes are able to be envisaged as accumula-
tions and expenditures of energy: all accumulation requires an
expense (functional energy, displacement, combat, work) but the
latter is always inferior to the former’ [VII 473], More technically:
tpi — > \|>., = dqp — » d-f mp.

*

Marx entitled his basic project ‘the critique of political economy’,
which is something similar to what some might now call a ‘double
reading’ in that — interpreting the accounts that the bourgeoisie
give of their economic regime - Marx found that the word ‘labour’
was being used in two different senses. On one hand it was being
used to designate the value imparted by workers to the
commodities they produce, and on the other hand, it was being
used to designate a ‘cost of production’ or price of labour to an
employer. With the ascent of the Ricardian school the tradition of
political economy had reached broad agreement that the price of a
commodity on the market depended upon the quantity of labour
invested in its production, but if workers are being paid for their
labour, which then adds to the value of the product, it is impossible
to detect any opening for profit in the production and trading of
goods. Marx’s basic insight was that being paid for one’s labour,
and the value of labour, were not at all the same thing. He coined
the term ‘labour-power’ [ Arbeitskraft ] for the object of transaction
between worker and employer, and kept the word ‘labour’ [Arbeit]
solely for the value produced in the commodity. Having thus
distinguished the concepts of ‘labour’ and ‘labour-power’ the next
step was to explore the possibility that labour-power might
function as a commodity like any other, trading at a price set by
the quantity of labour it had taken to produce. The difference
between the capacity for work and the quantity of work necessary
to reproduce that capacity would unlock the great mystery of the
origin of profit. If labour were traded in an undistorted market
with complete cynicism it should command a price exactly equal to
the cost of its subsistence and reproduction at the minimal possible
level of existence, just as any other commodity traded in such a
market should tend towards a price approximating to the cost of
the minimal quantity of labour time needed for its manufacture.
Marx thus speculated that the average price of labour within the
economy as a whole should remain broadly equivalent to the
subsistence costs of human life. Thus:




The curse of the sun 53


Value of labour - Price of labour = Profit

But why is it that labour-power comes to trade itself at a price
barely adequate to its subsistence? There is a twofold answer to
this, the first historical and the second systematic, although such
separation is possible only as a theoretical abstraction. Both of
these interlocking arguments are accounts of the excess of labour,
or of the saturation of the labour market:

1 In the section of Capital entitled ‘The So-called Primitive
Accumulation’ Marx attempts to grasp the inheritance of
capital, and is led to examine a series of processes which are
associated with the events in English history which are usually
designated by the word ‘enclosure’. Broadly speaking the mass
urbanization of the European peasantry, which separated larger
and larger slices of the population from autonomous economic
activity, was achieved by a more or less violent expulsion from
the land:

The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of the
capitalist mode of production, was played in the last third of
the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. A mass of
free proletarians was hurled on the labour-market by the
breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James
Steuart well says, ‘everywhere uselessly filled house and
castle.’ Although the royal power, itself a product of bourgeois
development, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly
hastened on the dissolution of these bands of retainers, it was
by no means the sole cause of it. In insolent conflict with king
and parliament, the great feudal lords created an incom-
parably larger proletariat by the forcible driving of the
peasantry from the land, to which the latter had the same
feudal rights as the lord himself, and by the usurpation of the
common lands. The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manu-
facturers, and the corresponding rise in the price of wool in
England, gave the direct impulse to these evictions. The old
nobility had been devoured by the great feudal wars. The new
nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the
power of all powers. Transformation of arable land into sheep-
walks was, therefore, its cry [Cap 672],

Urbanization is thus in one respect a negative phenomenon; a
type of internal exile. In the language of liberal ideology the




54 The thirst for annihilation


peasantry is thus ‘freed’ from its ties to agrarian production.
Liberie!

2 The labour market is historically saturated by the expropriation
of the peasantry, but it is also able to generate such an excess
from out of an intrinsic dynamic. In other words, capital creates
unemployment due to a basic tendency to overproduction. The
pressure of competition forces capital to constantly decrease its
costs by increasing the productivity of labour-power. In order to
understand this process it is necessary to understand two crucial
distinctions that are fundamental to Marx’s theory. Firstly, the
distinction between ‘use value’ and ‘exchange value’, which is
the distinction between the utility of a product and its price.
Every commodity must have both a use value and an exchange
value, but there is only a very tenuous and indirect connection
between these two aspects. An increase in productivity is a
change in the ratio between these facets of the commodity, so
that use values become cheaper, and labour power can be
transformed into a progressively greater sum of utility. Marx
seeks to demonstrate that this transformation is bound up with
another, which has greater consequence to the functioning of the
economy, and which is formulated by means of a distinction
between ‘fixed capital’ and ‘variable capital’. Fixed capital is
basically what the business world calls ‘plant’. It is the quantity
of capital that must be spent on factors other than (direct)
labour in order to employ labour productively. As these factors
are consumed in the process of production their value is
transferred to the product, and thus recovered upon the sale of
the product, but they do not — in an undistorted market - yield
any surplus or profit. Variable capital, on the other hand, is the
quantity of capital spent on the labour consumed in the
production process. It is capital functioning as the immediate
utilization of labour power, or the extraction of surplus value. It
is this part of capital, therefore, that generates profit. Marx calls
the ratio of variable capital to fixed capital the organic
composition of capital, and argues that the relative increase in
use values, or improvements in productivity, are — given an
undistorted labour market — associated with a relative increase
in the proportion of fixed capital, and thus a decrease in profit.

*


The problems that have bedevilled Marxian theory can be crudely




The curse of the sun 55


grouped into two types. Firstly, there is the empirical evidence of
increasing metropolitan profit and wage rates, often somewhat
hastily interpreted as a violation of Marx’s theory. In fact, the
problem is a different though associated one: the absence of a free-
market in labour. Put most simply, there has never been
‘capitalism’ as an achieved system, but only the tendency for
increasing commodification, including variable degrees of labour
commodification. There has always been a bureaucratic-coopera-
tive element of political intervention in the development of
bourgeois economies, restraining the more nihilistic potentialies of
competition. The individualization of capital blocks that Marx
thought would lead to a war of mutual annihilation has been
replaced by systematic state-supported cartelling, completely
distorting price structures in all industrial economies.

The second problem is also associated with a state-capital
complex, and is that of ‘bureaucratic socialism’ or ‘red’ totalit-
arianism. The revolutions carried out in Marx’s name have not led
to significant changes in the basic patterns of working life, except
where a population was suffering from a surplus exploitation
compounded out of colonialism and fascism, and this can be
transformed into ‘normal’ exploitation, inefficiently supervised by
an authoritarian state apparatus. Marxism - it is widely held - has
failed in practice.

Both of these types of problem are irrelevant to the Marxism of
Bataille, because they stem, respectively, from theoretical and
practical economism; from the implicit assumption that socialism
should be an enhanced system of production, that capitalism is too
cynical, immoral, and wasteful, that revolution is a means to
replace one economic order with a more efficient one, and that a
socialist regime should administer the public accumulation of
productive resources. For Bataille, on the contrary, ‘capital’ is not
a cohesive or formalizable system, but the tyranny of good (the
more or less thorough rationalization of consumption in the
interests of accumulation), revolution is not a means but an
absolute end, and society collapses towards post-bourgeois
community not through growth, but in sacrificial festivity.

Beyond political economy there is general economy, and the
basic thought at its heart is that of the absolute primacy of
wastage, since ‘everything is rich which is to the measure of the
universe’ [VII 23]. Bataille insists that all terrestrial economic
systems are particular elements within a general energy system,



56 The thirst for annihilation


founded upon the unilateral discharge of solar radiation'’. The
sun’s energy is squandered for nothing (= 0), and the circulation of
this energy within particular economies can only suspend its final
resolution into useless wastage. All energy must ultimately be spent
pointlessly and unreservedly, the only questions being where,
when, and in whose name this useless discharge will occur. Even
more crucially, this discharge or terminal consumption - which
Bataille calls ‘expenditure’ (depense) — is the problem of economics,
since on the level of the general energy system ‘resources’ are
always in excess, and consumption is liable to relapse into a
secondary (terrestrial) productivity, which Bataille calls ‘rational
consumption’. The world is thus perpetually choked or poisoned by
its own riches, stimulated to develop mechanisms for the
elimination of excess: ‘it is not necessity but its contrary, “luxury”, which
poses the fundamental problems of living matter and mankind" [VII 21]. In
order to solve the problem of excess it is necessary that
consumption overspills its rational or reproductive form to achieve
a condition of pure or unredeemed loss, passing over into sacrificial
ecstasy or ‘sovereignty’.

Bataille interprets all natural and cultural development upon the
earth to be side-effects of the evolution of death, because it is only
in death that life becomes an echo of the sun, realizing its
inevitable destiny, which is pure loss. This basic conception founds
a materialist theory of culture far freer of idealist residues than the
representational accounts of the dominant Marxist and psycho-
analytical traditions, since it does not depend upon the mediation
of a metaphysically articulated subject for its integration into the
economic substrate. Culture is immediately economic, not because
it is traversed by ideological currents that a Cartesian pineal gland
or dialectical miracle translates from intelligibility into praxis, but
because it is the haunt of literary possibilities that constantly
threaten to transform the energy expended in its inscription into an
unredeemed negative at the level of production. Poetry, Bataille
asserts, is a ‘holocaust of words’. A culture can never express or
represent (serve) capital production, it can compromise itself in
relation to capital only by abasing itself before the philistinism of
the bougeoisie, whose ‘culture’ has no characteristics beyond those
of abject restraint, and self-denigration. Capital is precisely and
exhaustively the definitive anti-culture.

Capitalism, then, is (the projection of) the most extreme possible
refusal of expenditure. Bataille accepts Weber’s conclusions




The curse of the sun 57


concerning the relationship between the evolution of capital
accumulation and the development of Protestantism, seeing the
Reformation critique of Catholicism as essentially a critique of
religion insofar as it ‘functions’ as a means of economic
consumption, or as a drain for the excess of social production. The
Protestant repudiation of indulgences - as well as its rejection of
lavish cathedral building and the entire socio-economic apparatus
allied to the doctrine of salvation through ‘works’ - is the cultural
precondition for the economy closing upon itself and taking its
modern form. Bourgeois society is thus the first civilization to
totally exclude expenditure in principle, opposed to the con-
spicuous extravagance of aristocracy and church, and replacing
both with the rational or reproductive consumption of com-
modities. It is this constitutive principle of bourgeois economy that
leads inevitably to chronic overproduction crisis, and its sympto-
matic redundancies of labour and capital. It is not that capital
production ‘invents’ the crisis which comes to be named ‘market
saturation’, it is rather that capital production is the systematic
repudiation of overproduction as a problem. To acknowledge the
necessity of a stringent (although perpetually displaced) limit to
the absorption of surplus production is already to exceed the terms
in which the bourgeoisie or administrative class can formulate its
economic dilemmas. A capital economy is thus one that is
regulated as if the problem of consumption could be derived in
principle from that of production, so that it would always be
determinable as an insufficiency of demand (during the period
roughly between 1930 and 1980 this has typically led to quasi-
Keynesian solutions nucleated upon US armaments spending).
Bataille, in contrast, does not see a problem for production in the
perpetual reproduction of excess, but rather, in a manner marking
the most radical discontinuity in respect to classical political
economy, sees production itself as intrinsically problematic precisely
insofar as it succeeds.




Chapter 3


Transgression


This is the freedom of the void which rises to a passion and takes
shape in the world; while still remaining theoretical, it takes
shape in the Hindu fanaticism of pure contemplation, but when
it turns to actual practice, it takes shape in religion and politics
alike as the fanaticism of destruction — the destruction of the
whole subsisting social order — as the elimination of individuals
who are objects of suspicion to any social order, and the
annihilation of any organization which tries to rise anew from
the ruins [H VII ].

the republic being permanently menaced from the outside by the
despots surrounding it, the means to its preservation cannot be
imagined as moral means, for the republic will preserve itself only
by war, and nothing is less moral than war. Task how one will
be able to demonstrate that in a state rendered immoral by its
obligations, it is essential that the individual be moral ? I will go
further: it is a very good thing he is not. The Greek lawgivers
perfectly appreciated the capital necessity of corrupting the
member citizens in order that, their moral dissolution coming into
conflict with the establishment and its values, there would result
the insurrection that is always indispensible to a political system of
perfect happiness which, like republican government, must
necessarily excite the hatred and envy of all its foreign
neighbours. Insurrection, thought these sage legislators, is not at
all a moral condition; however, it has got to be a republic’s
permanent condition. Hence it would be no' less absurd than
dangerous to require that those who are to ensure the perpetual
immoral subversion of the established order themselves be moral
beings: for the state of a moral man is one of tranquillity and
peace, the state of an immoral man is one of perpetual unrest that





Transgression 59


pushes him to, and identifies him with, the necessary insurrec-
tion in which the republican must always keep the government
of which he is a member [S III 498].

We have no true pleasure except in expending uselessly, as if a
wound opens in us [X 170].

the most unavowable aspects of our pleasures connect us the
most solidly [IV 218].

It has often been suggested - not least by Sartre - that Bataille
replaces dialectic and revolution with the paralysed revolt of
transgression. It is transgression that opens the way to tragic
communication, the exultation in the utter immolation of order
that consummates and ruins humanity in a sacrifice without limits.
Bataille is a philosopher not of indifference, but of evil, of an evil
that will always be the name for those processes that flagrantly
violate all human utility, all accumulative reason, all stability and
all sense. He considers Nietzsche to have amply demonstrated that
the criteria of the good: self-identity, permanence, benevolence,
and transcendent individuality, are ultimately rooted in the
preservative impulses of a peculiarly sordid, inert, and cowardly
species of animals. Despite his pseudo-sovereignty, the Occidental
God - as the guarantor of the good - has always been the ideal
instrument of human reactivity, the numbingly anti-experimental
principle of utilitarian calculus. To defy God, in a celebration of
evil, is to threaten mankind with adventures that they have been
determined to outlaw.

The Kantian cultural revolution is associated with a deepened
usage of juridical discourse in philosophy. Transcendental philo-
sophy equates knowing with legislation, displacing the previously
dominant axis of argumentation - extended between scepticism
and belief - with one organized in terms of legitimacy and
illegitimacy. The sense of logic, for example, undergoes a massive -
if largely subterranean - shift; from evident truth to necessary rule.
The metaphysical errors which Kant critiques are formally
described as crimes, and more specifically, as violations of rights.
The subject is divided into faculties, with strictly demarcated
domains of legitimate sovereignty, beyond which their exercise is a
transgression. Most important to Kant are the reciprocal injustices
of reason and understanding, with his First Critique detailing the
trespasses of reason upon the understanding, or theory, and his




60 The thirst for annihilation


Second Critique defending reason against theoretical incursions
into its proper domain; that of moral legislation. The lower
faculties of sensation, and, to a lesser extent, imagination, are of
more indirect concern, since they are branded as incorrigible
reprobates; corrupted by their insinuation into the swamp of the
body.

Kant initiated the modern tradition of insidious theism by
shielding God from theoretical investigation, whilst maintaining
the moral necessity of his existence. God was exiled into a space of
pure practical reason, simultaneously protected against intellectual
transgression and underwriting moral law. In his Critique of
Judgement Kant describes the moral impossibility of a world without
God, and the fate of one attempting to live according to it, in the
following terms:

Deceit, violence, and envy will always be rife around him,
although he himself is honest, peaceable, and benevolent; and
the other righteous men he meets in the world, no matter how
deserving they may be of happiness, will be subjected by nature,
which takes no heed of such deserts, to all the evils of want,
disease, and untimely death, just as are the other animals of the
earth. And so it will continue to be until one wide grave engulfs
them all — just and unjust, there is no distinction in the grave —
and hurls them back into the abyss of the aimless chaos of
matter from which they were taken — they that were able to
believe themselves the final end of creation [K X 415-16].

This passage might be from Sade’s Justine: the Misfortunes of Virtue,
reminding us that the age of Kant is tangled with that of Sade, a
writer who explored the exacerbation of transgression, rather than
its juridical resolution. Where Kant consolidated the modern pact
between philosophy and the state, Sade fused literature with crime
in the dungeons of both old and new regimes. Sade insisted upon
reasoning about God repeating original sin, but even after
obliterating him with a blizzard of theoretical discourse his hunger
for atheological aggression remained insatiable. Sade does not seek
to negotiate with God or the state, but to ceaselessly resist their
possibility. Accordingly, his political pamphlets do not appeal for
improved institutions, but only for the restless vigilance of armed
masses in the streets. ‘Abstract negation’ or ‘negative freedom’ are




Transgression 61


Hegel’s expressions for this sterilizing resistance which erases the
position of the subject. It could equally be described as real death.

Bataille’s engagement with Sade is prolonged and intense, but
also sporadic, consisting of articles and essays which never reach
the pitch of intimacy characterizing Sur Nietzsche. After Nietzsche,
however, it is Sade who comes closest to such an intimacy, and -
like Nietzsche — accompanies Bataille throughout the entire length
of his textual voyage, with an intellectual solidarity so great that it
touches upon a complete erasure of distinction. Sade plays an
important role in luring Bataille’s discussion of eroticism into its
abyssal (non)sense, because his writing is baked to charcoal in the
sacred. No writer fathoms more profoundly the utter inutility of the
erotic impulse, nor its sacrilegious and insurrectionary fury. ‘Sade
consecrated interminable works to the affirmation of unacceptable
values: according to him life is the search for pleasure, and
pleasure is proportional to the destruction of life. In other words,
life attains the highest degree of intensity in a monstrous negation
of its principle’ [X 179].

The orgies, massacres, and blasphemies of the Sadean text knit
almost seamlessly onto Bataille’s obsession with an intolerable
sacrificial wastage vomited into the suppurating cavity of the
divine. Bataille finds in these texts ‘the excessive negation of the
principle upon which life rests’ [X 168], a pitch of voluptuary
intensity at which eroticism passes unreservedly into the sacred.
Compared to the Sade-interpretations of Blanchot, for instance,
despite complex affinities and inter-textual communications, there
is a ravine as great as any that could be imagined; an
incommensurability of thought insinuated into a common and
inevitable vocabulary. ‘Negation’, ‘crime’, ‘atheism’, ‘revolt’, are
words that Bataille associates with a heterogeneity so repugnant to
elevated thought that its repression must be presupposed in the
origination of any possible speculation, whereas for Blanchot these
are words that belong to reason itself, at least, from the moment
that it is permitted to find itself in the solitude of literature. It is
only our inertia and our hypocrisy - as Blanchot suggests with an
insidious power - that protect us from the latent fury of reason.
Unlike Blanchot, Bataille does not emphasize the ruthless
consistency of enlightenment rationalism in Sade’s writings, even
though he acknowledges that Sade seems ‘to have been the most
consequential representative of XVIIIth century French material-
ism’ [I 337], ‘By definition, excess is external to reason’ [X 168], he




62 The thirst for annihilation


remarks in one discussion of Sade, and it is an incitement to
criminality, rather than an exultant rationality that he detects in
passages such as this:

atheism is the one system of all those prone to reason. As we
gradually proceeded to our enlightenment, we came more and
more to feel that, motion being inherent in matter, the prime
mover existed only as an illusion, and that all that exists having
to be in motion, the motor was useless; we sensed that this
chimerical divinity, prudently invented by the earliest legislators,
was, in their hands, simply one more means to enthrall us, and
that, reserving unto themselves the right to make the phantom
speak, they knew very well how to get him to say nothing but
what would shore up the preposterous laws whereby they
declared they served us [S III 482].

Either believe in God and adore him, or disbelieve and demobilize, for it is as
senseless to rage against omnipotence as inexistence. Thus it is that Sade’s
opponents take the two strands of his defiance to be mutually
contradicting, to cancel each other, and - once aufhebt - expressing
either a futile rage flung into the void, or a desperate plea for
reconciliation. ‘Blasphemy is never logical. If an omnipotent God
exists, the blasphemer can only be damaging himself by insulting
him; if he does not exist, there is no one there to insult’, writes
Hayman [Hay 31]. After all, how can one revolt against a fiction?
It is perhaps a symptom of fixation or regression, an unresolved
infantilism in any case, for affect to be detached so completely from
an acknowledged reality.

In a world divided between theistic enthusiasts and secularist
depressives there is little patience for the atheist who nurtures a
passionate hatred for God. The mixture of naturalism and
blasphemy that characterizes the Sadean text occupies the space of
our blindness, to which Bataille’s writings are not unreasonably
assimilated. If there is contradiction here it is one that is
coextensive with the unconscious; the consequence of a revolt
incommensurate with the ontological weight of its object. That
God has wrought such loathesomeness without even having existed
only exacerbates the hatred pitched against him. An atheism that
does not hunger for God’s blood is an inanity, and the anaemic
feebleness of secular rationalism has so little appeal that it
approximates to an argument for his existence. What is suggested
by the Sadean furore is that anyone who does not exult at the




Transgression 63


thought of driving nails through the limbs of the Nazarene is
something less than an atheist; merely a disappointed slave.

Amongst the diseases Bataille shares with Nietzsche is the
insistence that the death of God is not an epistemic conviction, but
a crime. It is no less worthy of cathedrals than the tyrant it
abolished, and whose grave it continues to desecrate. Indeed, such
new cathedrals are inextricable from the unholy festivities of
desecration which resound through them, as the texts of Sade,
Nietzsche, and Bataille themselves illustrate.

The illimitable criminality driving Bataille’s writing’s provokes
no hint of repentence within it, but that does not make him a
pagan, which is to say juridically: unfit to plead. Lacking the
slightest interest in justification, innocence is not an aspiration he
nourishes. He is closer to Satan than to Pan, propelled by a defiant
culpability. Bataille is altogether too morbid to be a pagan, and
yet, despite what is in part a reactive relation to Christianity, the
thought of necessary crime is an interpretation of the tragic, and of
hubris. Tragic fate is the necessity that the forbidden happen, and
happen as the forbidden. Quoting what he takes to be a latent
popular maxim, Bataille writes that ‘the prohibition is there to be
violated’ [X 67], He associates this subterranean collective insight
with an ‘indifference to logic’ [X 67] at the root of social
regulation, since ‘[t]he violation committed is not of a nature to
suppress the possibility and the sense of the emotion opposed to it:
it is even the justification and the source’ [X 67], One of his
formulae for this effective paradox is the ‘violation of] prohibition
. . . according to a rule’ [X 75]. Such a violation is not so much
provoked by prohibition, as it is compelled by an inexorable
process to which prohibition is a response. This thought is
commonly expressed within his writings in terms of the economic
inevitability of evil, and also, occasionally, as the eruption of
transgression.

As an overt theme, ‘transgression’ is nothing like as dominant
within Bataille’s writings as is often suggested, and it is only with
extraordinary arbitrariness that he can be described as a
‘philosopher of transgression’. If it were not for the sustained
discussion to be found in Eroticism it is unlikely that this term
would have come to be read as anything more than the marginal
elaboration of a more basic problem (that of expenditure,
consumption, or sacrifice). Nevertheless, criminal variations
analagous to transgression are prolifically distributed throughout




64 The thirst for annihilation


his writings, and lend themselves with apparent ease to a measure
of formulation.

In a broadly Nietzschean fashion, Bataille understands law as
the imperative to the preservation of discrete being. Law
summarizes conditions of existence, and shares its arbitrariness
with the survival of the human race. The servility of a legal
existence is that of an unconditional one (of existence for its own
sake); involving the submission of consumption to i ts reproduction,
and eventually to its complete normative suppression within an
obsessional productivism. The word Bataille usually employs to
mark the preserve of law is ‘discontinuity’, which is broadly
synonymous with ‘transcendence’; Bataille’s thought of discon-
tinuity is more intricate than his fluent deployment of the word
might indicate. It is the condition for transcendent illusion or
ideality, and precisely for this reason it cannot be grasped by a
transcendent apparatus, by the inter-knitted series of conceptions
involving negation, logical distinction, simple disjunction, essential
difference, etc.

Discontinuity is not ontologically grounded (in the fashion of a
Leibnizean monad for instance), but positively fabricated in the
same process that amasses resources for its disposal. Accumulation
does not presuppose a subject or individual, but rather founds one.
This is because any possible self — or relative isolation - is only
ever precipitated as a precarious digression within a general
economy, perpetually renegotiated across the scale of energy flows.
The relative autonomy of the organism is not an ontological given
but a material achievement which - even at its apex — remains
quite incommensurable with the notion of an individual soul or
personality. It is in large part because death attests so strongly to
this fact that theology has monotonously demanded its systematic
effacement.

Because isolation is - in an abnormal sense — ‘quantitative’,
quantity cannot be conceived arithmetically on the basis of
discretion. Base, general, or solar economics - which are amongst
Bataille’s names for economics at the level of emergent discon-
tinuities - cannot be organized by any prior conceptual matrix.
The distinctions between quantity/quality, degree/kind, analogue/
digital, etc., which typically manage economic thought, are all
dependent upon the prior acceptance of discontinuity or derivative
articulation. It is obvious that the economics or energetics which
Bataille associates with base cosmology cannot be identified with




Transgression 65


any kind of physicalistic theory, since the logical and mathematical
concepts underlying any such theory are devastated by the radical
interrogation of simple difference. With the operation of a
sufficiently delicate materialist apparatus general economy can in
large measure be thought, but in the end its fragmentary and ironic
character stems from a delirial genesis in the violation of articulate
lucidity.

The solar source of all terrestrial resources commits them to an
abysmal generosity, which Bataille calls ‘glory’. This is perhaps
best understood as a contagious profligacy, according to which all
inhibition, accumulation, and reservation is destined to fail. The
infrastructure of the terrestrial process inheres in the obstructive
character of the earth, in its mere bulk as a momentary arrest of
solar energy flow, which lends itself to hypostatization. When the
silting-up of energy upon the surface of the planet is interpreted by
its complex consequences as rigid utility, a productivist civilization
is initiated, whose culture involves a history of ontology, and a
moral order. Systemic limits to growth require that the inevitable
re-commencement of the solar trajectory scorches jagged perfora-
tions through such civilizations. The resultant ruptures cannot be
securely assimilated to a meta-social homeostatic mechanism,
because they have an immoderate, epidemic tendency. Bataille
writes of ‘the virulence of death’ [X 70]. Expenditure is irreducibly
ruinous because it is not merely useless, but also contagious.
Nothing is more infectious than the passion for collapse. Predomin-
ant amongst the incendiary and epidemic gashes which contravene
the interests of mankind are eroticism, base religion, inutile
criminality, and war.

*

In The Accursed Share Bataille outlines a number of social responses
to the unsublatable wave of senseless wastage welling up beneath
human endeavour, which he draws from a variety of cultures and
epochs. These include the potlatch of the sub-arctic tribes, the
sacrificial cult of the Aztecs, the monastic extravagance of the
Tibetans, the martial ardour of Islam, and the architectural
debauch of hegemonic Catholicism. Reform Christianity alone —
attuned to the emergent bourgeois order - is based upon a
relentless refusal of sumptuary consumption. It is with Protestan-
tism that theology accomplishes itself in the thoroughgoing
rationalization of religion, marking the ideological triumph of the




66 The thirst for annihilation


good, and propelling humanity into unprecedented extremities of
affluence and catastrophe. It is also with Protestantism that the
transgressive outlets of society are de-ritualized and exposed to
effective condemnation, a tendency which leads to the terrible
exhibitions of atrocity associated with the writings of the Maquis
de Sade at the end of the eighteenth century, anticipated already,
over three centuries before, with the life of Gilles de Rais.

Bataille describes his 1959 study of Gilles de Rais as a tragedy,
and its subject as a ‘sacred monster’, who ‘owed his enduring glory
to his crimes’ [X 277]. The bare facts are quite rapidly outlined.
Gilles de Rais was born towards the end of the year 1404,
inheriting the ‘fortune, name, and arms of Rais’ [X 345] due to a
complicated dynastic intrigue involving his parents Guy de Laval,
and Marie de Craon. Even by the standards of his times and rank
de Rais dissipated vast tranches of his wealth with abnormal
extravagance, in Bataille’s words ‘he liquidated an immense
fortune without reckoning’ [X 279]. At the battle of Orleans he
fought alongside Jeanne d’Arc, ‘acquiring renown as “a truly
valiant knight in arms” which survived right up to the point of his
condemnation to infamy’ [X 354], It has been suggested that the
two warriors were friends, but Bataille expresses reservations about
this hypothesis [X 356]. On the 30th May 1431 Jeanne d’Arc
was burnt by the English. In the years 1432-3 de Rais began to
murder children. His preferred victims were males, with an
average age of eleven years, although there was occasional
variation in sex, and considerable variation in age [X 426]. At least
thirty-five murders are well established, although the number was
almost certainly a great deal higher; the figures suggested at his
trial ranged up to two hundred.

In a somewhat inelegant passage from this study Bataille
recapitulates the (quasi-Weberian) general economic background
to his researches:

We accumulate wealth in the prospect of a continual expansion,
but in societies different from ours the prevalent principle was
the contrary one of wasting or losing wealth, of giving or
destroying it. Accumulated wealth has the same sense as wort,
wealth wasted or destroyed in tribal potlatch has the contrary
sense of play. Accumulated wealth has nothing but a subordinate
value, but wealth that is wasted or destroyed has, to the eyes of




T ransgression 67


those who waste it, or destroy it, a sovereign value: it serves
nothing ulterior; only this wastage itself, or this fascinating
destruction. Its present sense: its wastage, or the gift that one
makes of it, is its final reason for being, and it is due to this that
its sense is not able to be put off, and must be in the instant. But it
is consumed in that instant. This can be magnificent: those who
know how to appreciate consumption are dazzled, but nothing
remains of it [X 321-2].

The tragedy of de Rais, which Bataille extends to the nobility as a
whole, was that of living the transition from sumptuary to rational
sociality. He was dedicated by birth to the reckless militarism of
the French aristocracy, which Bataille summarizes in the formula:
‘In the same way that the man without privilege is reduced to a
worker, the one who is privileged must wage war’ [X 314], He is
emphatic on this point: ‘The feudal world ... is not able to be
separated from the lack of measure [demesure], which is the
principle of wars’ [X 318], and also: ‘primitively war seems to be a
luxury’ [X 78]. That honour and prestige is incommensurable with
the calculations of utility is an insistent theme in Bataille’s work, as
pertinent to the interpretation of potlatch amongst the Tlingit as to
the blood-hunger and extravagance of Europe’s medieval nobility.
The context of Christianity and courtly love should not mislead us
here.

The paradox of the middle ages demanded that the warrior elite
did not speak the language of force and combat. Their mode of
speech was often sickly-sweet. But we shouldn’t fool ourselves:
the goodwill of the ancient French was a cynical lie. Even the
poetry that the nobles of the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries
affected to love was in every sense a deception: before everything
the great lords loved war, their attitude differed little from that
of the German Berzerkers, whose dreams were dominated by
horrors and slaughter [X 303-4].

The feudal aristocracy held open a wound in the social body,
through which excess production was haemorrhaged into utter loss.
In part this wastage was accomplished by the hypertrophic
luxuriance of their leisured and parasitic existence, which echoed
that of the church, but more important was the ceaseless ebb and
flow of military confrontation, into which life and treasure could be
poured without limit. De Rais embraced this dark heart of the




68 The thirst for annihilation


feudal world with peculiar ardour. Bataille writes of ‘his entire -
his mad - incarnation of the spirit of feudalism which, in all of its
movement, proceeded from the games that the Berzerkers played:
he was tethered to war by an affinity that succeeded in marking out
a taste for cruel voluptuousities. He had no place in the world, if
not the one that war gave him’ [X 317], He continues: ‘Such wars
required intoxication, they required the vertigo and the giddiness
of those that birth had consecrated to them. War precipitated its
elect into assaults, or suffocated them in dark obsessions’ [X 317],
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the epoch of feudal
warfaring reached a crescendo, due to exactly the same processes
that were leading to its utilitarian reconstruction. Power was being
steadily centralized in the hands of the monarchy, and changes in
military technology effected a gradual shift in the social composi-
tion of the military apparatus. In particular Bataille points to the
way in which the development of archery supplanted the dominant
role of heavy cavalry, and to the fact that with the increasing
importance of arrows and pikes came an accentuation of military
discipline. War became increasingly rationalized and subjected to
scientific direction. This evolution was not rapid, but de Rais was
personally touched by it. The battle of Lagny in 1432 was the last
to plunge him into the heat of conflict, after which his position as
a marshal of France - which he had occupied since July 1429 -
detached him from the military cutting-edge. Bataille’s interpreta-
tion of these tendencies is emphatic: ‘ [A] t the instant where royal
politics and intelligence alters, the feudal world no longer exists.
Neither intelligence nor calculation is noble. It is not noble to
calculate, not even to reflect, and no philosopher has been able to
incarnate the essence of nobility’ [X 318].

War is progressively disinvested by the voluptuary movement
passing through the nobility, increasingly becoming an instrument
of rational statecraft, calculatively manipulated by the sovereign. A
process was underway that would lead eventually to the tightly
regimented military machines of renaissance Europe, led by
professional officers, and directed operationally in accordance with
political pragmatics. Bataille considers this transition from warlord
to prince to be crucial in de Rais’ case:

To the eyes of Gilles war is a game. But that view becomes less
and less true: to the extent that it ceases to predominate even
amongst the privileged. Increasingly, therefore, war becomes a




Transgression 69


general misfortune: at the same time it becomes the work of a
great number. The general situation deteriorates: it becomes
more complex, the misfortune even reaching the privileged, who
become ever less avid for war, and for games, seeing in the end
that the moment has come to lend space to problems of reason
[X 315],

Where the church erected cathedrals in a disfigured celebration
of the death of God, the nobility built fortresses to glorify and to
accentuate the economy of war. Their fortresses were tumours of
aggressive autonomy; hard membranes correlative with an acute
disequilibrium of force. Within the fortress social excess is
concentrated to its maximum tension, before being siphoned-off
into the furious wastage of the battle-field. It was into his fortresses
that de Rais retreated, withdrawing from a society in which he had
become nothing, in order to bury himself in darkness and atrocity.
The children of the surrounding areas disappeared into these
fortresses, in the same way that the surplus production of the local
peasantry had always done, except now the focus of consumption
had ceased to be the exterior social spectacle of colliding armies,
involuting instead into a sequence of secret killings. Rather than a
staging post for excess, the heart of the fortress became its
terminus; the site of a hidden and unholy participation in the
nihilating voracity which Bataille calls ‘the solar anus’, or the black
sun.

Perhaps one short passage will suffice in lieu of detailing these
crimes. Early in his study Bataille remarks:

His crimes responded to the immense disorder which inflamed
him, and in which he was lost. We even know, by means of the
criminal’s confession, which the scribes of the court copied down
whilst listening to him, that it was not pleasure that was
essential. Certainly he sat astride the chest of the victim and in
that fashion, playing with himself [se maniant], he would spill
his sperm upon the dying one; but what was important to him
was less sexual enjoyment than the vision of death at work. He
loved to look: opening a body, cutting a throat, detaching limbs,
he loved the sight of blood [X 278],

Amongst the problematic features of this passage is the fact that it
involves an oxymoron in the terms of Bataille’s writings, because
the prevailing sense of ‘work’ in these texts is exactly that of a




70 The thirst for annihilation


resistance to death. He describes work as the process that binds
energy into the form of the resource, or utile object, inhibiting its
tendency to dissipation. This difficulty is exacerbated by the
central role allocated to vision in Gilles’ atrocities. Work constrains
the slippage towards death, but it conspires with visibility. Scopic
representation and utility are mutually sustained by objectivity,
which Bataille - unlike Kant — understands as transcendence; the
crystallization of things from out of the continuum of immanent
flow. The ultimate inanity of Gilles’ aberration is attested by the
fact that it is not the taste or smell of death he seeks, but its sight.
(‘Seeking’ itself is the scopic form of craving.)

Gilles’ passion is sublime, in that it is an attempt to delect in
death (noumenon), and like Kant’s sublime it requires a ‘safe
place’ for its possibility, which in both cases is that of
representation as such. Of all sensory modalities vision is the
coldest and most distant, the one most conducive to the idealist
illusions which de-materialize irritation and precipitate the phan-
tasm of autonomous subjectivity. Vision is so pregnant with
incipient rationalization that it tends to involve an inherent
negative reflex, exaggerating its difference from touch. This is why
scopophiliac investments are not libidinal tropisms like any other,
but compromises; coaxing drives into the domesticated state
associated with representation, and by this means constraining
them to teleology. For desire to occupy the schema of approxima-
tion to a condition that is represented as its telos is consequential
upon the visualization of its activating irritation. Impulse is thus
lured into the trap of negativity, aspiration, and dependence upon
the reality principle; exactly the complex which Bataille sum-
marizes consistently as transcendence.

I hope that it is not mere timidity on my part that leads to this
reservation. It would be the shoddiest domestication to suggest
that some theoretical comfort were possible here. After all, it is
certainly not Rais’ ferocity that inhibits his full complicity with the
sun.

If transgression appears as the negation of law, it is only because
law is coextensive with the unachievable negation of solar flow, just
as base matter is deemed negative because it exhibits no resistance
to death. Nevertheless, insofar as crime receives its formulation in
the court-room it is quite properly understood as a speculative
development of legality, as Hegel demonstrates so meticulously in
his Philosophy of Right. Such an apprehension of crime through the




Transgression 71


optic of the trial is no merely empirical projection, but a bias
rooted in the juridical advantage of existence. Death has no
representatives. Which is to say that transgression has no subject.
There is only the sad wreck who Nietzsche calls ‘the pale criminal’,
de Rais at his trial for instance, terrified of Satan, separated from
his crimes by an unnavigable gulf of oblivion. The truth of
transgression, at once utterly simple and yet ungraspable, is that
evil does not survive to be judged.

Transgression is not mere criminality, insofar as this latter
involves private utility or the occupation by a subject of the site of
proscribed action. It is rather the effective genealogy of law,
operating at a level of community more basic than the social order
which is simultaneous with legality. Transgression is only judged as
such in the course of a regression to a pre-historical option which
was decided by the institution of justice. At this point the
sedimentation of energy upon the crust of the earth becomes
normatively reinforced by an affirmation of social persistence.
Nietzsche explores exactly this issue in section nine of the second
essay of his Genealogy of Morals, in which he describes the primitive
response to transgression:

‘Punishment’ at this level of civilization is simply a copy, a
mimus, of the normal attitude toward a hated, disarmed,
prostrated enemy, who has lost not only every right and
protection, but all hope of quarter as well; it is thus the rights of
war and the victory celebration of the vae victis in all their
mercilessness and cruelty - which explains why it is that war
itself (including the warlike sacrificial cult) has provided all the
forms that punishment has assumed throughout history [N II
813],

War is irreducibly alien to a collision of rights, so that it is war that
bears down on the one who violates right as such. Transgression is
not a misdemeanour, even if this is the necessary form of its social
interpretation. It is rather a solar barbarism, resonant with that of
the berserkers, and of all those who fathom an abysmal inhumanity
on the battle-field. No tragedy without an Agamemnon, or some
other mad beast of war, whose nemesis pre-empts the discourse of
the juridical institution, and whose death is thus marked by a
peculiar intimacy. Bataille writes:

Tragedy is the impotence of reason . . . This does not signify that




72 The thirst for annihilation


Tragedy has rights against reason. In truth, it is not possible for
a right to belong to something contrary to reason. For how could
a right be opposed to reason? Human violence however, which
has the power to go against reason, is tragic, and must, if
possible, be suppressed: at least it cannot be ignored or despised.
It is in speaking of Gilles de Rais that I come to say this, for he
differs from all those for whom crime is a personal matter. The
crimes of Gilles de Rais are those of the world in which they are
committed, and these ripped throats are exposed by the
convulsive movements of such a world [X 319].

*


However difficult or repellent the matter at stake might be, we can
scarcely avoid the search for the sense of transgression, which is the
requirement of relating it to the Kantianism which forms our
philosophical actuality. It is because Kant completes the under-
standing of the difference between laws and cases that his
involvement is already implict in any attempt to judge crimes.
(Hegel will of course suggest that to merely understand justice is
still insufficient, and that it remains to justify it.) Our world recoils
from meaningless crime even more forcefully than Rais’, since
modernity is in large part the necessity that death testifies, even if
it is in the guise of a ‘problematic concept’; serving as a limit to the
understanding. Knowing must be articulated with death, and the
philosophical vocabulary of the modern age is adapted to this task,
examples including: limit, Aufhebung, Indifferent . , differance, etc.
Bataille locates the word ‘sacrifice’ in this series, in which its
specific function is to mark the immanent or base continuity
between death and knowing, a continuity which is correlative to
the failure of transcendence, and is here described as ‘tragedy’, or
‘the impotence of reason’.

Tragedy - or the repulsion of discursive appropriation from
death - effects a sporadic textual disruption whenever it is
registered, since, although the productive usage of language ceases,
words still jut-out beyond the splinter fringe of discourse; tracking
a positive death-lip as it teeters into collapse. This ragged edge of
Bataille’s writing marks a disappearing base impulse, communicat-
ing with the virological reservoir of violated scription which he
calls a ‘holocaust of words’. Poetry, laughter, and filth have no
meaning. They are unable to commensurate to the defence of a
juridical subject. Nor can they be justified, affirmed, or protected.




Transgression 73


Rimbaud’s ruthless abandonment of poetry has a numbing
appropriateness.

The name ‘Bataille’ could easily mislead us. It might seem, for
instance, as if transgression had a defence, a voice. As if evil could
be a praxis or a cause. It is in such ways that senseless loss might
be neutralized within rationality. There are certainly good reasons
for seeking to reconstruct some such ‘Bataille’. It is an unfortunate
fact that such projects inevitably fail, not because of some ‘death of
the author’, but because of the death that is precisely not that of
the author, or of anybody else. ‘Bataille’s’ irrelevance is due to a
death denuded of all sophistical ornamentation, a death that is the
vortex of evil, and as such sufficiently incommensurate with his
discourse to be exiled to ‘the impossible’, only puncturing his text
as a dark shaft of inavowable impersonality. Literature is itself a
crime.

Law is not exercised upon inert beings, but only upon those
whose cooperation can be claimed. Obedience is always at least
minimally active. This is why the recipient of a commandment is
characterized as an agent, and why lawfulness attests to an implicit
sovereignty. Docility in respect of the law is quite different from a
surrender, in exactly the way that moralists are different from
mystics. Surrender is a deeper evil than any possible action. The
very principle of action is an acceptance of justice and responsibil-
ity, and any act is - as such — an amelioration of crime, expressing
defiance within the syntax of redemption. In stark comparison with
action, surrender gnaws away the conditions for salvation. Giving
itself up to a wave of erasure, the agent dies into the cosmic
reservoir of crime. Beyond the (agentic) pact with Satan lies an
irreparable dissolution into forces of darkness, apart from which
there is no ecstasy. Surrender is not a submission to an alien
agency (devotion to God), but a surrender of agency in general, it
is not any kind of consigning of oneself over to another (return to
the father), but utter abandonment of self; a dereliction of duty
which aggresses against one’s birth.

Bataille’s reading of Rais is a discourse on evil, or a philosophy
of the sublime, and not a poem, a sacrificial denudation, or an
effectuation of death. It cannot be sufficiently stressed that evil is
never on trial. The same bedrock of human docility that in Rais
generates the complex of separations between self and activity, self
and victim, culpability and death, is also at work in Bataille’s text,
producing equivalent transcendent effects. Just as with Rais’ pact




74 The thirst for annihilation


with the devil, his association with Bataille is contractual,
socialized, respectful of identities and norms. It is in accordance
with a reconstructive or discurive exigency that a visual theme and
the philosophical schema of sublimity, along with the proper
names ‘Gilles de Rais’ and ‘Georges Bataille’, line up in a
testament to transgression. Such reportage might be the ape of
glory, but it would be difficult to maintain that it was alien to Rais’
case, or that his superstition, vanity, and voyeurism did not work
to transform him into a recognizable figure; schematizing him into
our world. Rais cannot be innocently resuscitated on the outside of
modernity, as if represention was a pure transcendence, qualified
to judge the specificity of accumulative sociality. To the extent that
we accommodate ourselves to the good, that which is wretched,
reserved, and confessional about Rais belongs also to us.




Chapter 4

Easter


In a sense, the world is still, in a fundamental manner, immanence
without clear limit (indistinct flowing of being into being, I dream
of the unstable presence of waters interior to water). It is so to such
an extent that the position, interior to a world, of a ‘supreme being’,
distinct and limited like a thing, is first of all an impoverishment.
There is without doubt, in the invention of a ‘supreme being’, a
will to define a value greater than any other. But this desire to
grow has as its consequence a diminution [VII 301],

God does not abandon Jesus except fictitiously [VI 85].

*

I wiped the blade against my jeans and walked into the bar. It was
mid-afternoon, very hot and still. The bar was deserted. I ordered
a whisky. The barman looked at the blood and asked:

‘God?’

‘Yeah.’

‘S’pose it’s time someone finished that hypocritical little punk,
always bragging about his old man’s power . . .’

He smiled crookedly, insinuatingly, a slight nausea shuddered
through me. I replied weakly:

‘It was kind of sick, he didn’t fight back or anything, just kept
trying to touch me and shit, like one of those dogs that try to fuck
your leg. Something in me snapped, the whingeing had ground me
down too low. I really hated that sanctimonious little creep.’

‘So you snufled him?’

‘Yeah, I’ve killed him, knifed the life out of him, once I started I
got frenzied, it was an ecstasy, I never knew I could hate so much.’
I felt very calm, slightly light-headed. The whisky tasted good,





76 The thirst for annihilation


vaporizing in my throat. We were silent for a few moments.

The barman looked at me levelly, the edge of his eyes twitching
slightly with anxiety:

‘There’ll be trouble though, don’tcha think?’

‘I don’t give a shit, the threats are all used up, I just don’t give a
shit.’

‘You know what they say about his old man? Ruthless bastard
they say. Cruel . . .’

‘I just hope I’ve hurt him, if he even exists.’

‘Woulden wanna cross him merself,’ he muttered.

I wanted to say ‘yeah, well that’s where we differ’, but the
energy for it wasn’t there. The fan rotated languidly, casting
spidery shadows across the room. We sat in silence a little longer.
The barman broke first:

‘So God’s dead?’

‘If that’s who he was. That fucking kid lied all the time. I just
hope it’s true this time.’

The barman worked at one of his teeth with his tongue, uneasily:
‘It’s kindova big crime though, isn’t it? You know how it is,
when one of the cops goes down and everything’s dropped ’til they
find the guy who did it. I mean, you’re not just breaking a law,
your breaking LAW.’

I scraped my finger along my jeans, and suspended it over the
bar, so that a thick clot of blood fell down into my whisky, and
dissolved. I smiled:

‘Maybe it’s a big crime,’ I mused vaguely ‘but maybe it’s
nothing at all . . .’

‘. . . and we have killed him’ writes Nietzsche, but - destituted of
community - I crave a little time with him on my own.

In perfect communion I lick the dagger foamed with God’s blood.

*

This book was supposed to be finished at Easter, like God.

It will take longer.

God sighs, he can’t get it together, time is passing, he is losing all
sense for time. Crucifixion passes like an agitating dream. Nails, a
little blood. None of it seems very serious.

The ants insult me with this faint dribbling of pain. Am I not the creator
of a Hell?




Easter 77


Christ screams on the cross: ‘Father, your parsimony disgusts me,
is this a death?’ He thinks of the abortion he missed, lying wrapped
in bloody rags on the floor of a cheap hostelry. He is excited by the
thought of his mother in mortal sin, and of a harsher love than he
ever knew. How was it possible for her to forgo the delight of
hacking God’s fruit from her womb? (That was a chance for
religion.) ‘For, behold, the days are coming in which they shall say,
Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the
paps which never gave suck’ [John XXIII:29],

Instead there was ‘an odious comedy’ [VI 85], this hollow
melodrama of Easter.


*

Ash slimed with pain my exultation is unbearable

mother do you still bleed? God asks

his guts forked out into the dust

yellow and fat like insect smear

death always a stranger

and your idiot smile

spawning monstrosity with dulled eyes

*


Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachtani ? [Mark XV:34],
There is no answer.

Merely the blank violence of the sun.

*


I am far from intolerant of Nietzsche’s aristocratism. It does not
seem obvious to me that someone living amongst Christians should
feel disposed to democracy. It would be less demeaning if the
beasts in the fields were to legislate in one’s name.

For this ‘reason’ I consider myself at war with my society,
complying with its ordinances only insofar as these convenience my
dominant whim. I acknowledge none of its agents or authorities,
except in the way a fox acknowledges the hunt. A state is already a
sufficient object for disgust, let alone one that allies itself with the
Christian religion.

Not that it is a virile struggle that I wage. I wheeze, massaging
my headache, but without hope. I imagine myself old, still alive,
somewhat fatter, and a Christian. Sickened, I push on. I see myself
kneeling, drooling pieties . . . longing to be saved.



78 The thirst for annihilation


What could more thoroughly demonstrate my unbelief than
entertaining such obscenities . . . ?

*

There is only one sane and healthy relation to Christianity; perfect
indifference. Mine is not of that kind. My detestation for the
Christian faith exhausts my being, and more. I long for its God to
exist in order to slake myself as violence upon him. If there are
torments coming to me I want them, all of them; God
experimenting in cruelty upon me. I want no lethargy in Hell,
rather vigour and imagination. Oh yes, it is all very wretched, and
if I am grateful to Christianity it is for one thing alone; it has
taught me how to hate.

God drinks upon the poison of my hate with an erotic ardour,
since his ruthless erasure is even more precious to him than it is to
me. After tasting deep surrender in his passion to annihilate, how
could he relish a return to the sordid world of obedience; to that of
his duty to exist ? Nothing comes to religion later - or more abjectly —
than God.

I have not been a theist for a single second of my life. In my first
assemblies at primary school, when the theistic idiocy was first
wheeled out, I remember thinking: it is natural that adults should
lie to you, but is it really necessary for them to insult the
intelligence quite this much? As for the longing to believe, nothing
could be more alien to me, because nothing is more obvious than
the fact that humanity - far from being a creation - is a disease.
Why should the absence of a divinity analogical to mankind be
more disturbing than the absence of a giant tortoise supporting the
world on its back? If pressed, I would be forced to argue that the
latter belief offers more consolation, adds greater richness to
cosmology, exhibits greater intellectual sophistication. Monotheists
are like those dull and uninspired children who compel you to
patronize them. In the end, one has to ignore them, one cannot
stoop far enough to argue, after all, if they are capable of believing
such things what are they not capable of believing? An insipid
pseudo-religion in the terminal phase of its senescence is perhaps
safer than the rejuvenating absurdities into which its disillusioned
adherents would undoubtedly stumble.

In the first moment in which I understood what I was being
asked to believe I immediately knew why I was being asked to do
so. Could there be a less subtle, a more brutal way of trying to




Easter 79


frighten people into being good? I cannot think of one, however
strenuous my attempts. God the father . . . what could be less
challenging than a psychoanalysis of monotheism? A delusion that
refuses to hide itself, to mask or complicate itself, to compromise its
tedious insanity; its critics - after scarcely beginning the task of
demolition - have always caught themselves yawning. The great
defence mechanism of this cult; to be too uninteresting to fight.
Morality has clung to inanity with an unmatched fervour, the most
hated heretics were always those who threatened to introduce
thought, enquiry, or style into religion; to undermine its monotony.
To be burnt by the church it sufficed to question the omnibanality
of God.

Sometimes I wonder what is to be involved in writing this book.
I am not a particularly industrious individual. The protocols of
scholarship have always confused me. It is 03:10 in the morning
and as I lean against the wall my finger runs across a line in the
plaster, a fissure, dissociation . . .

Momentarily I know one thing (alone):

Bataille’s most unfailing signature is spiritual disease.

*

I dream of the damnation I have so amply earned, stolen from me
by the indolence of God.




Chapter 5


Dead God


Ghost in tears
O dead God
hollow eye
damp moustache
single tooth
O dead God

0 dead God
Me

1 pursued you
with unfathomable
hatred

and I would die of hatred
as a cloud
is undone [V 121].

I am not a philosopher but a saint, perhaps a madman [V
218n],

Bataille does not transmit a philosophy, but rather a delirious
negative evangile: ‘death can be tasted ’. Monotheism has always
pre-emptively reconstructed this message: ‘you mean it can be
known.’

Whatever else Bataille’s Method of Meditation might be, it is also
the violent contamination of Cartesianism. The title itself is
compacted from Descartes’ Discourse on Method and his Metaphysical
Meditations, perhaps his principal texts. The reference is not
incidental, since Descartes is a limit-point of isolation, and in Inner
Experience Bataille explicitly discusses him in such terms. Descartes
sought to know God, and to make use of this knowledge
philosophically. In this way a certain theological suppression of





Dead God 81


religion is consummated, with the philosopher sealing himself
definitively within the prison of representation.

Cartesian thinking understands itself ideologically in terms of a
‘radical doubt’ (in reality wholly spurious), which is designed to
serve it as an indisputable starting point for its intellectual
productions, thus masking its neo-scholastic apologetic character.
The corrosive force of doubt is to be pre-emptively exhausted in the
initiation of the modern philosophical project, and thus mastered/
ejected by constructive reason without delay. What is in truth the
extreme cowardice of Cartesian doubt - its undisturbed piety - is
necessitated by its immediately theological character, since from
the perspective of the church the slightest hint of radical
interrogation is suspect. Such ‘doubt’ merely replays the sham
humility of Christian hope in the secular mode, rendering it
epistemological, but maintaining its hypocritical and dogmatic
character. Faith takes on the form of certainty in knowing, without
ceasing to be inflexibly superstitious.

The Cartesian ego in its function as indubitable foundation
serves to equilibriate reason and existence, or rather, carries the
inherited and uninterrogated certainty of this equilibrium forward
into secular reason. This coherence of existent knowing has always
been taken by philosophy to be the evident principle of ontology, or
the harmonious reciprocity of knowing/being. From Plato, through
the Scholastics, to Descartes and beyond, thought presupposes and
confirms existence, just as existence bears witness to its origin in
divine ideation. Ontology can only be consummated by a being
that is adequate to the highest forms of being — those that are
insulated against the processes of corruption or degeneration that
bring about a subsidence into non-being — so that it is finally in the
divine image (which is, anyway, conveniently anthropoid) that the
indestructible soul must be wrought. Only an immortal entity is
able to reflectively apprehend pure being, without becoming
inevitably lost in the swamp of matter; that dangerous compacted
mass of being and annihilation, malignantly metamorphic, infec-
tious, gnawed, and rotten with time.

In keeping with the inherent tendency of all ontology, Descartes’
ego is thus an extremity of separation; a capsule-entity stripped of
all relations other than those mediated by God, and moving only in
strict succession from self, through the divine, to a weakly
conceived alterity. It finds an immaculate relation to the profane
world through representation, by means of which its being is



82 The thirst for annihilation


reserved from the hazards of contact in the very exercise of

knowing. It is in accord with such a doctrine that negation is

purified of its raw materiality, and is thought as a function of

representation, a logical operation, the denial of a thesis by and for

a subject whose positivity is repeated indifferently throughout any
series of intellectual affirmations or denials.

It is in Descartes’ philosophy that doubt is exhibited in its
definitively profane sense, as despair transcended by the ego of
ontological knowing. This profanation of oceanic despair - the
opening of modernity in philosophy — does not subvert scholastic
reasoning, but rather fulfills it, since it is the triumph of theology
over religion. It is thus that in diagnosing the poverty of modern
thinking Bataille is not advocating any variety of squalid historical
regression, because the only characteristic of scholastic philosophy
worthy of affirmation is its ineffectiveness, rooted in a servile idiocy
that has proven to be remarkably tenacious. Despair is not a motif
of theology, but a lacuna within it. It is neither disbelief, or doubt,
both of which involve an ambivalence in the application of logical
signs to an ontologically petrified thesis, but an unknowing so
radical that it both escapes the scope of any possible epistemology
and lacks all doctrinal intelligibility. Despair cannot be defined as
a claim, hesitation, denial, or uncertainty. It is an abandonment,
and a plea without conceivable destination; a desertification
resulting from the catastrophic disappearance of the value of being.
Despair is not humble, but hubristic, and it is not pious in the
least, but tragic.

In The Birth of Tragedy Nietzsche indicates that the issue at the
core of the tragic is community. Despite the earliness of this text —
written at a time when Nietzsche still adhered to a Wagnerian
exaltation of the nation — the sense of community at work in it is
only superficially commensurable with a thought of ethnic,
political, or social unity. Tragic community is not the affirmation
of a collective identity, but rather the dissolution of all identifiable
traits in an uncircumscribable movement of catastrophe and
festival; catastrophe of the individuated self, festival of anonymous
flow. Sacred communion (as opposed to mere empirical aggrega-
tion) cannot be politically restricted, since it does not proceed by
means of a controllable process of assemblage, but by the blinding
subsidence of autonomy. This takes the form of the sacrifice of the
collectively invested individual; the tragic hero, the prince, God.
Its emblem, therefore, is not the reverance of the masses (for




Dead God 83


leader, homeland, culture, race, or creed), but regicide and
eruption in the streets.

From the first verse of John’s Gospel to Hegel’s Science of Logic ,
and beyond, Western history traverses a thanatological plateau.
Man is the animal that knows it will die, determined in its essence
by a knowledge whose specific mode is an immortalizing
sublimation.

In the massively preponderant aggregate the Christian religion
has preached not just the contingency of death, but its impossibility.
God, for instance - insofar as he is shackled to his credibility - is
unable to die, despite his melodramatically vaunted omnipotence.
This is an infacility that is protracted through the angels. Humans
are at least permitted a ludicrous pretence at termination (Christ:
God pretending to be a man pretending to die), but only the beasts
are able to truly expire, perhaps because only they are left alone to
do so.

The death of God that Nietzsche outlines is not without a
partial anticipation. If humanity’s most morbid religion is
initiated by an act of God, such an act is surely best described as
a botched suicide attempt. It seems likely, as is so often the case,
that this was a gesture, a plea for attention. The Judaeo-Christian
portrait of God is a classic sketch of pathological insecurity. How
desperate he is to be loved! So insufficient to himself, and so
alone. How sickening to live for ever in this way. Unable to even
dream of escaping the smell of oneself. No one hates God as much
as God. No one hates anything as much. It is not difficult to
imagine his excitement, attending the nihilistic ruin of his cult.
The prospect of release at last! Freed of all responsibility to serve
as the principle of beings! His emergent superfluity must have
welled up in him with the power of sexual crisis, such that it had
all suddenly not been.

There are times when one’s pity for God becomes overwhelming;
nothing has ever had to bear a more ignoble inexistence than he.
To not exist without excuse (as St Anselm demonstrated), his very
essence condemns him for this default. Could there be a more
humiliating sinecure? When a replacement for God was sought in
the years 1888-9 even Nietzsche - that maniac of compassion —
was reluctant to accept the post [N III 1351].

*

The madman. — Have you not heard of that madman who lit a




84 The thirst for annihilation


lantern in the bright morning hours, ran to the market place,
and cried incessantly: ‘I seek God! I seek God!’ - As many of
those who did not believe in God were standing around just
then, he provoked much laughter. Has he got lost? asked one.
Did he lose his way like a child? asked another. Or is he hiding?
Is he afraid of us? Has he gone on a voyage? emigrated? — Thus
they yelled and laughed.

The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with
his eyes. ‘Whither is God?’ he cried; ‘I will tell you. We have killed
him - you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how did we do
this? How could we drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to
wipe away the entire horizon? What were we doing when we
unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now?
Whither are we moving? Away from all suns? Are we plunging
continuously? Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is
there still any up or down? Are we not straying as through an
infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has
it not become colder? Is not night continuously closing in on us?
Do we not need to light lanterns in the morning? Do we hear
nothing as yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying
God? Do we smell nothing as yet of the divine decomposition?
Gods, too, decompose. God remains dead. And we have killed
him.

‘How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all
murderers? What was holiest and mightiest of all that the world
has yet owned has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe
this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves?
What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to
invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must
we not ourselves not become gods simply to appear worthy of it?
There has never been a greater deed; and whoever is born after
us - for the sake of this deed he will belong to a higher history
than all history hitherto.’

Here the madman fell silent and looked again at his listeners;
and they, too, were silent and stared at him in astonishment. At
last he threw his lantern on the ground, and it broke into pieces
and went out. ‘I have come too early,’ he said then; ‘my time is
not yet. This tremendous event is still on its way, still
wandering; it has not yet reached the ears of men. Lightning and
thunder require time; the light of the stars requires time; deeds,
though done, still require time to be seen and heard. This deed is




Dead God 85


still more distant from them than the most distant stars — and yet
they have done it themselves .’

It has been related that on the same day the madman forced
his way into several churches and there struck up his requiem
aetemam deo. Led out and called to account, he is said to have
replied nothing but: ‘What after all are these churches now if
they are not tombs and sepulchers of God?’ [N II 126-8].

God is nowhere to be found, yet there is still so much light! Light
that dazzles and maddens; crisp, ruthless light. Space echoes like
an immense tomb, yet the stars still burn. Why does the sun take
so long to die? Or the moon retain such fidelity to the Earth?
Where is the new darkness? The greatest of all unknowings? Is
death itself shy of us?

The brilliance of God’s non-being provokes a wave of cynical
laughter. How strange that God’s last act should be so entertain-
ing! A good joke, but rather an old one now. It spawned
innumerable witticisms that circulated in the market-place; a final
testament dissipated amongst the buzz of commodity exchange,
but they faded fast. What was the death of God anyway? A slight
fizz of exuberance in the stock-market? A moderate lightening of
the spirit? A relaxation? The end of a badly-scripted play, greeted
by the languid effervescence of cheap champagne?

For a long time there have been more important things to talk
about in market-places. The things they save the expensive
champagne for. Perhaps they laugh a little at God’s demise
occasionally, but they are bored by it. Even his taxidermists have
deserted him, the best of them at any rate. Those that remain are
mostly the otherwise unemployable; the second rate, the incom-
petent or unenthusiastic. So he deteriorates still, becoming more
moth-eaten and absurd. If they laugh at all it is because Jahweh
has come to seem so much like a neglected teddy-bear; balding,
one arm hanging loose, an eye coming away. When they were
children stories about bears had frightened them. Not any more.

There was always something shoddy about this God. Lost on the
way to being, and to us. Even lost, for a little while, on the way to
death. A stumbler, an unwitting clown, everything he does is
botched, improvised, ostentatious; his past a mix of gaucherie and
tantrum. Nowhere a hint of precocity, but always retardation,
leaving abundant signs of a debilitating learning-difficulty wherever
he makes a mark, a slow child. (Even the theologians admit to his




86 The thirst for annihilation


‘simplicity’.) His diminishing flock rarely ask him about scientific
matters any more, few of them dare ask themselves. He long ago
dropped out of such classes, to the secret relief of his family. For a
while they insisted that he had other gifts - ineffable ones — and
(with the blindness of mothers) praised the ageing infant’s good
nature, which they said had calmed down a lot. One can only
smile.

Maybe it is that we brought out the worst in him. For who could
doubt God’s fear of us? Was he not omniscient? Did he not always
see the rusty dagger in our hands? And we were created in his
image! (The corporealization of his hatred for himself.) What
tatters of self-love remained to him came apart at this sight. To
reign over all things, as the archetype of man. A piteous enough
truth to exhibit.

Few things approximate so closely to infinity as the humorous
incommensurability between man and the sum of the universe. To
span such a gulf within oneself is to live an idiocy. To be not only
an animal, but a depraved one: an aborted animal, a sick animal, a
delirious animal. Upon first seeing a rabid dog one thinks it is
becoming human. This is not a promising basis for divinity.

If he hid from us it was only in attempting to hide his eyes; to
block us out. Yet amongst the accidents of his omniscience - or of
his inexistence - was included the absence of eyelids. We burnt on
his sleep-starved retina like harsh stars. Our deicide crawled like a
rash upon his skin. He could only stare at us, and our history
ensued; a convulsion of lethal horror.

Of course, he made innumerable attempts at emigration, but
who would have him? Who wants a second-hand God? Philosophy
provided only a temporary refuge; rebelling eventually against his
bad manners. How nostalgic he was of his days as a carpenter,
once he had become a tramp.

It is tempting to dredge into our lassitude, seeking another end
for God. Might he not have been allowed to retire? The state would
surely have granted him a modest pension (does not Kant provide
the basis for such a policy?). After all, few would dispute that senile
tyrants make wretched victims. It seems scarcely more dignified to
kill God than to slaughter a dog when it becomes too old to work.
Who, then, is still capable of Nietzsche’s generosity? It is rare to
find one who takes much pride in slaughtering God these days.
More common is a vague feeling of impurity; one has soiled oneself
by bothering with something so vile and corrupt. That God was



Dead God 87


ever permitted residence amongst us is a source of embarrassment,
or, at best, of uneasy humour. It is understandable that many
should feel vaguely bad about God, was he not a little too
vulnerable, old, and pitiful to kill? Should we not greet his
inexistence with an impatient ‘of course’, and turn to more serious
things? Do we really lack the delicacy to let God die quietly, on his
own, like a dog?

It is true that we probably merited a better God to sacrifice. It is
not unreasonable to imagine that a cosmos that spawned a
Herakleitus deserved a more dignified ruler than the grumpy old
ape of Occidental monotheism. Nevertheless, it is pointless nursing
such regrets. They belong to the mournful ‘might have beens’ of
our history; decided long before we had a chance to shop around for
a God.


*

Bataille ends an early article entitled ‘Propositions’ with the words:
‘the true universality is the death of God’ [I 473]. He is insistent,
throughout the entire sweep of his work, that the death of God, as
announced in Nietzsche’s The Gay Science, is to be thought of as a
religious event, indeed, as the positive end of religion (as zero) 10 .
For Bataille - far more than for Nietzsche - the atheology thus
engendered is of a specifically Christian character, in that it is
rooted in the ‘sense’ of the crucifixion. Bataille reads the world
historical power of Christianity through its quasi-latent content of
an absolute sacrifice — that of God himself - which has created a
religion of divine suicide. At the same time he considers
Christianity to have deformed and obscured this thought, burying
it under a theology of redemption. In the development of
monotheistic belief man ‘tends to substitute for the evident
prodigality of the heavens the avidity which constitutes him: it is
thus that little by little he effaces the image of celestial reality with-
out sense or pretension and replaces it with a personification (of an
anthropomorphic nature) of the immutable idea of Good’ [I 518].
The subordination of the sacred category of death to the rational
category of immorality (perdurant value) is a profanation of
religion; the transformation of sacrifice into utility, exchange, and
negotiation. A God unable to expend itself utterly is a figure of
servility and abjection, bound to persistence with iron chains. ‘God
the transcendent guarantee of being — the service of God abasement
before this principle: that being persist, be imperishable [IV 167].’




88 The thirst for annihilation


Bataille insists that Nietzsche’s thought of the death of God is
sacrificial, orgiastic, and festive. Christian belief must pass over not
into a complacent scientistic utilitarianism, but into the ecstasies of
uninhibited wastage. The loss of God is the loss of self, the
definitive shattering of the anthropic image, so that the perdurant
ego of servile humanity is dissolved into the solar energy flow.
Bataille is not remotely interested in being saved, he wants only to
touch the extreme, writing that ‘I have wanted and found ecstasy’
[V 264], an ecstasy that is the experienced loss of being. This is not
a matter of dying, but of surviving (momentarily) only through
excess, as chance, without guarantees, and without inhibiting the
dissipative tide:

Being is given to us in an intolerable surpassing of being, no less
intolerable than death. And because, in death, this is withdrawn
from us at the same time it is given, we must search for it in the
feeling of death, in those intolerable moments where it seems that
we are dying, because the being in us is only there through
excess, when the plenitude of horror and that of joy coincide [111
11 - 12 ],


*

God has only one possible meaning: Phallus. The God of the
ontological argument is Omniphallus, in whom reason, being,
authority, and the good coincide. It belongs to the essence of a
perfect being that he exist forever. Who could deny that the
crucified was well hung? But perhaps one should not laugh about
such things, for even if God is a comic, one’s willy - and its
mythology - has surely to be taken seriously.

As for Jahweh’s immense throbbing member, that is a matter of
the gravest consequence. Through it he establishes himself as the
supreme transcendent object, eternally postponing the black spasm
whose result is detumescence and the end of the universe. Were
God to ever sacrifice his erection for a taste of death the principle
of identity would dissipate into scorched dust, and being would
relapse into the dark.

Phallus — as psychoanalysis has always said. — is the same as
castration. To be an immortal organ of intimidation is to abstain
forever from the movement twisted through oblivion and relapse.
In The Solar Anus Bataille remarks: ‘Those in whom the force of
eruption is accumulated are necessarily situated below [en has]'



Dead God 89


[I 85]. What God must never succumb to is the molten penis of
terrestrial coupling, for which logic (of castration) has lost its
sense, because nothing remains to separate it from vulvic
dissolution.


*

In the final spasm of sexual anguish God bites off his penis and -
with his maw dripping blood - mewls like a dying hyena into the
void.


*

- Would you like to see my rags? she said.

With both hands gripping the table, I turned towards her.

Seated, she lifted a leg high: in order better to open the slit, she

drew apart the skin with both hands. Thus the ‘rags’ of Edwarda

gazed at me, hairy and pink, full of life like a repugnant octopus.

I stammered softly:

- Why do you do that?

- You see, she said, I am GOD . . . [Ill 21]

The narrator of Madame Edwarda proceeds to kiss the whore’s ‘rags’
as the Christian mystics kiss the wounds of Christ. There can be
little doubt that Bataille imagines the vulva as a wound, but this is
not because of a negative relation to castration. Far from being an
excised penis, the vulva is a complex terrain of contact with death,
of exactly the kind castration proscribes. Nor can the flowing
wound that breaks open being into communication be one pole of a
sexual relation - matched by a plenitude — since this vulvic
opening would be sexuality itself, except there is no such thing as
sexuality itself.

The ancient Romans are only the most famous example of the
arithmetical gratuitousness of zero. When zero is absent it is not
missed; no one notices the default of default. Nevertheless,
counting systems enriched by zero - and the place-order associated
with it - are of massively enhanced sophistication over those
in which nothing is missing. Introducing nothing makes an
inestimable difference.

Zero is indivisible, so that zero belief cannot be rigorously
differentiated from belief in zero. It is in this sense that atheism is a
religion. Not that atheism is committed to a specific conviction,
quite the opposite; it is precisely the specificity of conviction that it




90 The thirst for annihilation


attacks. Understood negatively it denies the false absolute of theos,
but understood positively it affirms the true absolute marked by
the ‘privative’ a-; the nihil from which creation proceeds, the
undifTerentiable cosmic zero.

When the valet touched the slit he groaned:

— In the name of God [IV 41]!

I drink in your rending
and I spread your naked legs
I open them like a book

where I read that which kills me [IV 14, 161].

I am God

I knock on your head
herr priest
I kill you

I am a cunt [III 158].

Everything has obviously gone wrong for us in order for Plato to
begin with One rather than Zero. To take One as originary is to
presuppose everything; such as unity, individuation, achieved
form, and dogmatic plenitude. The One is the phallomorphic base
of Occidental culture, in the sense that Irigaray understands it. It
is the mono- of monotheism, and monotheism is condensed
irreligion; the definitive patriarchal effacing of intra-uterine
indifferentiation (and thus of the primary ripple from out of chaotic
zero). The differentiated one is the Father, and his adorers
understand nothing of religion. Even in writing the nothing, as
Aquinas does, they eclipse it with absolute ego. (Him). Nor is it the
case that primary immanence is merely crushed with arbitrariness
beneath a partially inadequate metaphorics, since — far from being
neutral between the sexes — it is precisely because indifferentiation
(= 0) is sexually unsegmented that it is even more feminine than
the mother. The femininity of zero is uncompromised by its
indifference, due to the unilateral character of individualizing
deviation. Whilst zero is certainly alien to the Father, there is no
differentiation from zero. Indeed, zero is so utterly vulvo-uterine
that patriarchy is synonymous with irreligion (faith).

Between barter systems and money systems there is a difference
strictly analogous to that between Roman arithmetics and the
place-value system from India, transmitted by the Arabs to the
West. Like zero, money is a redundant operator; adding nothing in




Dead God 91


order to make things hum. When Marx associates capital with
death he is only drawing the final consequence from this
correspondence. Surplus value comes out of labour-power, but
surplus production comes out of nothing. This is why capital
production is the consummating phase of nihilism, the liquidation
of theological irreligion, the twilight of the idols. Modernity is
virtual thanocracy guided insidiously by zero; the epoch of the
death of God. There is no God but (only) zero — indifferentiation
without unity — and nihil is true religion.

Schopenhauer remarks of the cosmic vulva (=0):

We must not even evade it, as the Indians do, by myths and
meaningless words, such as reabsorption in Brahman, or the
Nirvana of the Buddhists. On the contrary, we freely acknowledge
that what remains after the complete abolition of the will is, for
all who are still full of the will, assuredly nothing. But also
conversely, to those in whom the will has turned and denied
itself, this very real world with all its suns and galaxies, is —
nothing [Sch II 508],




Chapter 6


The rage of jealous time


For thou shalt worship no other god: for the LORD whose name
is Jealous, is a jealous God [Exod XXXIV:14],

For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God
[Deut IV:24],

14. Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people
which are round about you.

15. (For the LORD thy God is a jealous God among you) lest
the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth [Deut VI],

Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the fire of my
jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen [Ezek
XXXVL5],

God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth,
and is furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries,
and he reserveth wrath for his enemies [Nah 1:2].

Amongst the many partial anticipations of the modern thought of
the transcendental in antiquity is the jealousy of Jahweh. Extricated
from its childish psychological constriction — its commensuration to
a personal being - this is one of the few religious thoughts to be
found in the history of Western monotheism. To refuse to share, to
coexist, to tolerate equivalence; these things are ruthlessly divine.
In comparison to Jahweh, the God of the Christians is a wheedler;
a door to door salesman. It is true, nevertheless, that the genocidal
frenzy with which Jahweh asserts his monopoly can disconcert.
Squeamishness is not a charge one can fairly bring against him:

1. When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither
thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before





The rage of jealous time 93


thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;

2. And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee;
thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make
no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:

3. Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter
thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take
unto thy son’ [Deut VII],

16. But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God
doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing
that breatheth:

17. But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely the Hittites, and
the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites,
and the Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee
[Deut XX],

Jealousy is inextricable from paroxystic violence, historically rooted
in national chauvinism, before being sublimed into the cosmologi-
cal intolerance of a divinity. What does it matter who is instrument
here? Whether God serves the annihilating designs of a tribe, or the
tribe serves to purify the earth of alien gods? There is no
antagonism at the origin, but rather a perfect pact between the
election of the chosen people and the brutal solitude of the
unnameable One.

What the Jews never understood about this God (the Christians
understood it even less of course) was the sovereignty of this jealous
wrath. How could these feverish rages be subordinated to an end
beyond themselves, to a mere persistence, as if God - too - was
subject to inhibition? A God that held himself in check, submitting
the splenetic extravagance of his moods to the exigency of being,
would be something far less glorious than the sun (he would be
humbled by a mediocre star). Each creature uselessly dispensing
with its existence would outstrip his prodigality, deepening by a
ratchet-notch his hatred for himself.

Could such a God glimpsing the impossible sovereignty of his
fury - time opening as a dark shaft of impersonal loss - and,
howling in utter loathing at the servility of self, restrain from
scurrying to a squalid death on the cross?

God savours himself, says Eckhart. This is possible, but what he




94 The thirst for annihilation


savours is, it seems to me, the hatred which he has for himself, to
which none, here on Earth, can be compared (I could say: this
hatred is time, but that bothers me. Why should I say time? I
feel this hatred when I cry; I analyse nothing) [V 120],

Why should anyone be interested in time? I cannot imagine. The
scrawniness of an arm, a finger, the enigma of a face; these things
make sense (hurt). Time, on the contrary, is as vacant as a
marriage, or God alone in the dark.

At the moment I seize myself in the mire of being, swamped by
the detestation of ulterior ends, I AM GOD AND TIME
LAUGHS AT THE ETERNAL PRETENTION OF SLAVES.
‘This God who leads us beneath his clouds is mad. I know him, I
am him’ [III 39]. (Bataille recommends that one chant: ‘I
represent myself covered in blood, broken but transfigured and at
one with the world, at once like prey and like a tooth of TIME
which kills incessantly and is incessantly killed’ [I 557-8].)

*


Jealousy is as inextricable from a movement of abolition as it is
essential to the being of God. Time cannot be limited to a property
or attribute of divinity, for this would make jealousy posterior to a
preliminary legislation of essence. It would, in any case, be
impossible for God to resent the absolute wilderness of time, since
his hatred must pander to the flow of erasure. Perhaps it is that
God mistakes himself for time, until he sees things die without
reluctance, and turns upon himself in unfathomable desperation. I
AM THAT I AM is already a pre-emptive afflux of incinerating
privilege, or it is nothing. In the beginning was the rage, or is it
that we imagine God being disappointed by his creation? A
surprised God? A bewildered God? His great work gone astray.
This is the psychological divinity, taken aback by naughty
children, the offended God that we tell our five year olds about. A
God without wrath, but only ‘righteous anger’. A magistrate. What
could such a being fail to botch? But jealousy is not indignation,
and at the moment of unfettered rage, when God no longer serves
anything, and the molten edge of his wrath delects in the
submission of being to sovereign whim, then ‘authority no longer
belongs to God but to time’ [I 471].

Bataille writes of ‘the catastrophe of time’ because security
cannot establish itself, because time is jealous of being. It is in his




The rage of jealous time 95


early essay ‘Sacrifices’ (1936) that he first develops this thought to
its rigorous conclusion in incompletion and collapse. No ontology
of time is possible, and yet ontology remains the sole foundation for
discursive accomplishment. There are only the shattered spars and
parodies of philosophy, as ruinous time pounds thought into the
embers of an unwitting sacrifice, wreathed in a laughter as cold
and nakedly joyous as the void.

Time is not the synthesis of being and of nothing if being or
nothing do not find themselves except in time and are nothing
but arbitrarily separated notions. There is not then in effect
either being or nothing in isolation, there is time [I 96],

[T]he existence of things is not able to enclose the death which
this existence brings, but is itself projected into the death that
encloses it [I 96].

Time is the suicidal jealousy of God, to which each being — even
the highest — must fall victim. It is thus the ultimate ocean of
immanence, from which nothing can separate itself, and in which
everything loses itself irremediably. The black mass of jealous rage
swells like a cancer at the core of the universe, or like a volcanic
ulceration in the guts of God, and its catastrophic eruption
consumes all established things in the acidic lava of impersonality.
We say ‘time’ — and become philosophical — to describe jealousy
purifying itself of God (but with God purity collapses also).

Perhaps there is still passion in God, but it is passion as the dog
is the dog when the dog is on a leash. There is no possibility for
the passion of God to unchain itself, since God is reason.
Perhaps the experience of the mystics is in accord with me,
because it shows that from the sacred one must leave a place for
an unchaining which receives no limits, since, from the sacred, it
is necessary to break every species of boundary, to no longer
consider limits either of reason or morality as possible. But, once
again, at this moment, is it not evident that God dies? [VII 370],

That jealous time erases all things is in no sense the acknowledge-
ment of a de-materialization, since the only place to escape from
matter was God. The thought that matter is not a content of time
is perhaps the preeminent shadow of a truth that is ‘at once’ an
impossibility and an abomination (also an ecstasy). As the shock-
wave of jealousy ejects the universe’s lactescent debris from the




96 The thirst for annihilation


crater of reason, transcendent matter loses the perfection of its
inertia (design), and nature implodes into the spasms of its own
laceration. As the destroyer the universe is time, and as the
destroyed nature, but in the destruction nature sloughs-off the
crust in which it had petrified itself and infests time like rot,
regressing to its molten core; base-matter, becoming, flow, energy,
immanence, continuity, flame, desire, death. ‘Ecstatic time is not
able to find itself except in the vision of things that puerile hazard
makes brusquely appear: cadavers, nudities, explosions, spilt
blood, abysses, bursts of sun and of thunder’ [I 471].

There is every reason to resist such insanity, reason is nothing
else. Nothing could be more evidently intelligible than the fact
that: ‘no enterprise has cost a sum of labour greater than that
which sought to arrest the flow of time’ [I 504], ‘Civilization’ is the
name we give to this process, a process turned against the total
social calamity - the cosmic sickness - inherent to process as such.
If the deluge, which is danger in itself, is the final motor of history,
it is the great civilizations which are the engines or composite
machines, channeling flows and engendering the mirage of
function. As with an ant’s nest, what emerges in the aggregate is a
frenetic immobilism, a literal robotism, converting process into
work, and work into the further embalming of process. Everything
is set against ‘the explosive immensity of time’ [I 472], Insofar as a
civilization functions, therefore, it becomes increasingly sclerotic
and pyramidalized; rituals, customs, codes, all hardened against
the release of unendurable forces that would follow from the melt-
down of the energy source (which is pushed further and further
upstream, purified).

The long period stretching from the Ancient empire of Egypt to
the bourgeoise monarchy of Orleans — which elevates the obelisk
in the square ‘to the applause of an immense populace’ - has
been necessary to man in order to achieve the setting of the most
stable limits to the deleterious movement of time. The mocking
universe being slowly delivered to the severe eternity of its All-
Powerful Father, guarantee of deep stability. The slow and
obscure movements of history have their place here at the heart
and not the periphery of beings and it is the long and inexpiable
struggle of God against time that they figure, it is the combat of
‘established sovereignty’ against the shattering and creative
madness of things. Thus history endlessly resumes the response




The rage of jealous time 97


of the immovable stone to the Herakleitean world of flows and
flames [I 505].

This is a movement of synchronization; distilling-out an absolute
time to provide a form for history without impingement, extrinsically
compiling events into manipulable series. Every civilization aspires
to a transcendent Aeon in which to deposit the functional apparatus
of chronos without fear of decay. What is dammed-up in the Aeon is
the densely material time of rupture and ruthless re-creation,
whilst what remains to anaemic chronology is time as the medium
of homogeneous, commensurable, and reproducible processes; a
domesticated temporality adjusted to work, from which catastrophe
has been abstracted-out through sublimation into the infinite.
Synchronization is founded upon an immense and precarious
stabilization; the petrification of a pure and absolute time, or the
completion of time as such (the timeless essence of time).
Synchronization has as its basic presupposition the Aeon as final
register of events, as the perfectly immaculate scroll upon which
creation’s unfolding is inscribed, and it is because of this that it
corresponds to the servility of God; to his proper function and
cosmic duty as book-keeper of the universe. In other words,
synchronization has as its condition of possibility the imperative
rationality of the divine. Nietzsche tells us that — even after it has
occurred - it takes a long time for the death of God to arrive, but
that does not mean it is delayed, rather: it unleashes the
asynchronicity whose ultimate repression God was. To be too early
— i mz.eitgemd.fi - is not at all to wait. It is to suffer the eruption of
real time. Neither is death the arbitrary content of asynchronicity;
a subject predicated by it. Death is not extrinsically, but
inherently, asynchronous.


*

1 2. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and
the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is
the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works.

13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death
and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they
were judged every man according to their works.

14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the
second death.




98 The thirst for annihilation


15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was
cast into the lake of fire [Rev XX],

But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerors, and idolators, and
all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire
and brimstone: which is the second death [Rev XXI :8].

It seems that something is in fact annihilated. The end and the
beginning correspond. At the beginning was God alone.
Therefore things will be brought to a point where there is again
nothing but God alone. Thus all creatures will be annihilated —
voice of Aquinas’ heretical interlocutor [A XIV 51].

No text has programmed the thought of death in the Western
tradition more fundamentally than chapters XX and XXI of
Revelation, where its historically dominant topic is established,
namely, the ‘second death’, or terminal fate of the soul (see also
Rev 11:11, XX:6). Augustine’s City of God, written between AD 413
and 427, established the orthodox interpretation of these passages.
The ‘second death’ is first mentioned in Book XIII chapter 2 [CG
510], but the decisive text is chapter 12 of the same book, where he
remarks:

the first death consist of two, the death of the soul and the death
of the body; so that the first death is the death of the whole
person, when the soul is without God and without a body, and
undergoes punishment for a. time. The second death, on the
other hand, is when the soul is without God, but undergoes
punishment with the body [CG 522],

He concludes this brief discussion with the words:

the last or second death, which has no other death to follow it
[CG 522],

The second death is thus aligned rigorously with eternal
damnation, which is in turn conceived on the basis of the language
found in Revelation and elsewhere: the infernal terminology that has
provided the West with its imagery of ultimate torment for two
millennia. To die the second time is to burn forever, suspended
without cessation in the flames of Hell. This infinitely protracted
combustion process transcends the terrestrial arbitrariness of the
first death, constituting a limit to the operation of the negative; an
unsurpassable incendiary horizon.




The rage of jealous time 99


As is always the case with Augustine, his account is charac-
terized by its vulgarity, gracelessness, and complete destitution of
intelligence. This oafish crudity was to provide a crucial model for
later Christian discourses on the subject, and captures very well
the essentially brutal nature of the faith, which even the more
spirited Christian writers would continue to propagate in the mode
of traditional authority. Thus it is that Thomas Aquinas — who
demonstrates intellectual and literary powers immeasurably out-
stripping those of Augustine - places those powers in the service of
the Augustinian dogmas, typifying the most noble pattern of
orthodox Christian culture: that of sophisticating an inherited
spiritual loutishness.

It is Aquinas’ stupendous Summa Theologiae — an intellectual
cathedral that is perhaps the greatest single achievement of
Christian civilization - that Bataille parodies in his own Somme
Atheologique (‘everything that one sees is the parody of another, or
perhaps the same thing in a deceptive form’ [I 81] as he remarks in
The Solar Anus). It is Aquinas’ meticulous construction of the
inherited faith in this work that provides the first solid cultural
foundations for the exercise of Christian authority, a function
analogous to that of Kant in our own age (in which epistemology —
or regulated scepticism - comes to replace theology under the
impetus of a massive infrastructural transformation of socio-
historical production processes). Aquinas began writing the Summa
in 1265, when he was forty years old, and continued it - with
intermittent interruptions - until his death in 1273. Far more than
the messy, wildly inconsistent, and arbitrarily compiled text we
know as ‘the bible’, it is the Summa that provides a doctrinal basis
for hegemonic Christianity, and the return to primary scripture -
associated above all with Luther — marks the beginning of an
inexorable degeneration process.

The central accomplishment of the Summa is that of establishing
a rational basis for the Augustinian rantings that had become
embedded in the faith, and prominent amongst these is the
conception of the ‘second death’ as eternal torment, bound to the
doctrine of the soul’s natural immortality (the deepest well-spring
of Christian ressentiment) . The heart of Aquinas’ argumentation on
this matter is found in the four articles of Question 104 [A XIV
35-55], which is arguably the most important text in the entire
sweep of scholastic philosophy.

The position Aquinas inherited from Augustine can scarcely be




100 The thirst for annihilation


described as philosophical. It is at most an attempt to construct
some semblance of doctrinal consistency on the basis of conscien-
tious but talentless scriptural exigesis conducted in the context of
an anti-pagan polemic that aspires to persecutory authority. Not
that this in any way compromises Augustine’s claim to be
exemplary of Judaeo-Christian piety, on the contrary; his rabid
intolerance responds perfectly to the dominant tone of monotheistic
belief. Nevertheless, one can only sympathize with Aquinas, trying
to argue for the rationality of the faith, whilst behind him
reverberate deranged barkings such as this:

But in that last condemnation, although a man does not cease to
feel, his feeling is not that of pleasure and delight, nor that of
health and tranquillity. What he feels is the anguish of
punishment, and so his condition is rightly called death rather
than life. The second death is so called because it follows the
first, in which there is a separation of natures which cohere
together, either God and the soul, or the soul and the body. It
can therefore be said of the first death that it is good for the
good, bad for the bad; but the second death does not happen to
any of the good, and without doubt it is not good for anyone
[CG 511].


*

Aquinas’ extraordinarily intricate task was to reconstruct the
Christian doctrine of death on orthodox grounds (but this time
rational ones), without succumbing to the humanistic impiety
latent in the notion of the soul’s natural immortality. Both
Irenaeus and Arnobius had challenged this doctrine, considering it
incompatible with the absolute dependence of all created things
upon God, and even Augustine himself seems at times to
undermine it. Once the natural immortality of the soul is
questioned, however, it is but a short step to the thought that the
unreformably wicked might be simply extinguished - after an
appropriate period of rigorous punishment - rather than eternally
tortured: a doctrine that Irenaeus seems to have held, and
Arnobius certainly did. This is the extreme heresy of an-
nihilationism, later to be associated with the Socinians (who were
vigorously persecuted for it) and other Arians. It was considered so
heinous a belief throughout the hegemonic period of Christian
domination that professing it was literally suicidal, since it merited




The rage of jealous time 1 01


a reaction on the scale of atheism itself: torture and death (both
first and second, although atheists were no doubt more concerned
about the first). D.P. Walker, in his discussion of seventeenth and
eighteenth century annihilationism, remarks that: ‘atheists and
Socinians, who were supposed to believe in the annihilation of the
wicked, were generally considered outside the bounds of even the
broadest religious tolerance; since they were socially dangerous, it
was the business of the state to eliminate them’ [DH 4],

It is thus a mark of considerable integrity that Aquinas - some
400 years earlier — insists upon the (limited) plausibility of the
annihilationist case. He divides his argument into stages, first
affirming God’s power to annihilate, and only then denying that
this power is in fact exercised by a benevolent being (eternal
damnation as the sentimentality of God). He concedes, in the first
stage of this argument:

just as before things existed God had the power of not giving
them existence, and thus of not creating, so also once they are
created he has the power of not continuing to uphold them in
existence; they would then cease to be. That is annihilation
[ Quod est eas in nihilum redigere ] [A XIV 49],

Annihilation or — more precisely — the return to nothing, is related
to two interconnected concepts of decisive importance to scholastic
theology; those of creation and conservation. The nihil of annihilation
is the nothing from which creation brings forth the being, since
‘what is created comes out of nothing [ex nihiloj’ [A VIII 41],
Creation both draws the being out of nothing, and holds it out of
nothing, or conserves it. The perpetual conservation of the being is
a positive and incessant causation that relates it immediately to
God, so that ‘[wjere God to annihilate, it would not be through
some action, but through cessation from action’ [A XIV 51].
Annihilation is thus a release from action ; a relapse that has a merely
negative relation to God. It is the being’s own tendency that leads
it to annihilation, as soon as God ceases to interfere in the
creature’s relation with absolute death (which is alien to God, since
his relation to nothingness is purely inhibitive). In one sense the
being of the creature communes with God as its cause, but as a
difference from the nihil the tension of the creature relates only to
death, and God’s participation is that of a third party incidentally
impinging upon a communication that escapes him. God and the
nihil squabble over creation as jealous rivals fight over a shared




102 The thirst for annihilation


lover, except that the creature — however much it might respect
God — is torn by its desire in quite the other direction, whilst the
nihil has all the tantalizing indifference that naturally flows from
incomparable powers of seduction.

*

The heresy of annihilationism, by ridding itself of the distracting
circus of damnation, clarifies the fundamental impetus of Judaeo-
Christian monotheism as no other doctrine can. This God is the
antagonist of zero, and therefore the fortress of identity, per-
sonality, individuation. To be exiled definitively from such a God -
to lose his protection - is to relapse into indivisible non-being; de-
created into the nihil. That annihilationism has failed to have a
significant influence upon Christian orthodoxy attests in part to the
tenacious privilege that folk religion and superstition have always
maintained over intellectual consistency within the churches, but
more importantly, it indicates the voluptuary and disciplinary
investment in the thought of the eternal torment of the wicked
(exemplified by Augustine).

For the pious annihilationist the perpetuation of existence
beyond death is conceived as a reward, reserved only for the
deserving, more precisely, the good. More profound than the
vulgar empiricity of torment, it is non-being that is the true
punishment. The souls of the wicked are subject to the undifferenti-
able pole of an absolute judgement; simple extinction. For those
who remain stubbornly unenticed by the prospect of the long post-
necroid haul under God there is thus a surgical and non-
penitentiary alternative.

Like all blocks of reactive libido, annihilationist Christianity
mapped a displaced active impulse within itself. Utter dissolution
is offered as a lure, but safely imprisoned in a system of ethico-
logical exclusion processes; permeable only to that inarticulate
ardour which springs from the repressed materiality of the human
animal. The taint of evil, or of divine (paternal) disapproval, serves
as one barrier screening the ego from the non-image of death. Even
more important — because more deeply concealed - is a trap
simultaneous with the origin of the logical; that of viewing death
from the perspective of God. God — a being - is conceived as
thinking both being and its negation with unperturbed mastery, so
that non-being is thought through the power of a (supreme) being;
as being qualified by absolute impoverishment, and as the inferior




The rage of jealous time 1 03


pole of a bifurcation within being. Above all, non-being is simply to
be thought, and the divine model of logical relatedness secures
being in its privileges; adorning it in the robes of methodological
presupposition. Death expresses the law, and thus subordinates
itself to the highest being. The intellectual neutrality that is thus
attributed to God in his comprehension of non-being is the real
possibility of a thanatology, or logic of death.

Pious annihilationists are committed not only to the possibility of
thanatology, but to its effective existence in the divine intellect, as
the absolute pinnacle of reason and justice. For them thanatology
is architecturally fundamental to divine law. Such servile annihila-
tion is an eliminative negativity, which can be thought of in two
broad ways: either as a formal or as a speculative relation
(deconstruction is happy to accept it as either before displacing it).
Formal elimination corresponds to a positivity understood as
extraneous to its negative qualification, whilst speculative elimina-
tion - formalistically (mis)conceived — is the simultaneous
inherence and non-inherence of such qualification to positivity. In
both cases the content of such a negation is determined by that
which is qualified by it, which is the precise definition of
elimination. The Spinozistic principle that Hegel enthusiastically
embraces as the speculative restlessness germinal in formal
reasoning - Omnis delerminatio est negatio — means that a positivity is
determined by its exact elimination, or, in the words attributed to
Hegel in the Zusatz to his lesser Logic: ‘[t]he foundation of all
determinateness is negation’ [H VIII 196].

The in- of indetermination can only be read as either the formal
negation or the speculative development of determination if it is
itself understood as eliminative, which is to say, determinate. Such
a move is of course — when fully explicit - Hegelianism itself. Quite
different is the indeterminate sense of indeterminate negation,
which is not eliminative, but ferocious. Ferocious negation is
radically heterogenous in respect to the annihilation it effects, so
that it is intrinsic to its definition that it cannot be derived from its
eliminative consequences by either formal or speculative logic. Far
from being topic neutral, logic is reasoning from the basis of secure
existence, which is to say, in the absence of time (Hegel thinks
history, but not time). The laws of identity, non-contradiction, or
determinate negation attain their rigour only by qualifying itself
with respect to metamorphosis: insisting upon the simultaneity of
logical relations, or the absence of temporal differentiation




1 04 The thirst for annihilation


(asynchronicity). Such a qualification is constitutive for ideality,
whether in the weak (scientistic) or the strong (theological) sense.
In other words; ideality is nothing other than logical obedience or
pure being, and the topic of logic is ontology. It is unfortunate for
the logicians that suicide is not a mere decision, but also a
technical problem, exemplifying the irreducibly heterogeneous
relation between the ‘being’ and its potential for inexistence (which
is never even remotely its own). Such a heterogeneity is attested
more generally by the struggle for oblivion and the positivity of the
sacrificial process. It is the ferocity of death that entangles it in
eroticism. ‘The sexual act is in time what the tiger is in space’ [VII
21]. Unlike a logical negation, death requires a complex occasion:
intricate conjunctions, the interpenetration of bodies, turbulent
flows. There are innumerable ways to die, but this proliferation of
routes out of the maze does not lead to the simplicity of a general
negative possibility.

Ferocity is not reflectively determined through the exercise of a
negation, indeed, it has no determination at all, but only a real
composition generated in a violent collision of heterogeneous
elements, whose issue is a complex synthesis. The various
negativities consummated in complex syntheses have no logical
equivalence, but only real consistency, or, in Bataille’s terms,
community. It is because the realization of expenditure requires the
assemblage of a complex synthesis that there is a problem of
consumption, finding its inevitable issue in an impossibility, in the
sensation of dying or undeath: existence out of excess. Nature, far
from being logical, ‘is perhaps entirely the excess of itself’ [III
219], smeared ash and flame upon zero, and zero is immense.




Chapter 7


Fanged noumenon
(passion of the cyclone)


The supreme concept with which it is customary to begin a
transcendental philosophy is the division into the possible and
the impossible. But since all division presupposes a concept to be
divided, a still higher one is required, and this is the concept of
an object in general, taken problematically, without its having
been decided whether it is something or nothing [K III 305-6].

what matters is not the enunciation of the wind, but the wind
[V 25],

*

Peter Hillmore’s report for the Observer [5th May 1991, p.23]
begins:

As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean. The water is still
now, almost unnaturally so as if it was resting from its
monumental act of carnage, exhausted by its orgasmic tidal
surge.

Nothing seems to move. The water, so savage last week, now
laps gently round the bodies. Half-embedded in the mud and
very, very still, a child lies in the water, arms and legs stiffly
outstretched, its body bloated by the heat, its face battered and
bloody.

Next to it lies the body of a calf, its eyes wide in final
uncomprehending shock. A few yards away in the middle of the
road lie the bodies of two dead fish, as if the sea had even turned
on its own.

The state of Bangladesh, until 1971 East Pakistan, is nestled in the
delta complex of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers, and is
amongst the poorest as well as the most densely populated regions





106 The thirst for annihilation


of the earth. It is a country whose natural inheritance is a
mixture of fertility and disaster, and whose people are exposed by
their poverty to the unimpeded course of elemental forces;
rendered naked before the storms. Since records began in the
eighteenth century at least 1.2 million Bangladeshis have been
killed by cyclones, as many as half a million in the storm of 1970
alone.

Cyclones are atmospheric machines that transform latent energy
into angular momentum in a feed-back process of potentially
catastrophic consequence. Their conditions of emergence are a
warm water surface, a latitude of at least five or six degrees
deviation from the equator (such that the Coriolis effect is
operative), a pronounced instability in the air column or a low
surface pressure, and the absence or virtual absence of wind shear.
When these conditions coexist a cyclone can develop, over a period
that normally lasts from four to eight days. A large cyclone
transfers 3.5 billion tons of air an hour from the lower to upper
atmosphere, and releases energy in the order of 10 25 ergs every
second. At the centre of the cyclone is a still zone of low pressure
known as the ‘eye’ or ‘core’ which registers no radar echo, and
which functions as the immobile motor of the storm’s angular
momentum or expressed energy 11 .

Large cyclones have the impact of immense explosions, and
when they strike the coast of Bangladesh they leave a shock-wave
in the silt, throwing-up numerous evanescent islands in the
shallows of the gulf of Bengal. Due to the general hunger for land,
and the richness of the sediment that has been carried down to
the sea, these fragile traces are enthusiastically occupied, rice is
cultivated upon them, and fish harvested from their shores. It
takes no great feat of imagination to envisage the fate of the
peasants and fishermen clustered on these insubstantial ripples of
earth when the cyclone returns, and instantaneously consumes the
tenuous vestiges of previous ravages. The densely inhabited silt
traces are not merely flooded, but utterly erased, as everything
which had seemed solid is dissolved into the vortex of the storm.
The people of the Bangladesh coast are episodically consumed by
a harsh truth from which we can momentarily hide. Being a
patriarchal faith, or doctrine of identity, the Islamic culture
predominant in Bangladesh is no better a preparation for this
liquidation than Judaism or Christianity would be. Nevertheless,
an annihilation such as that of the cyclone - in which all stability




Fanged noumenon 107


is washed away and loss alone prevails - is not merely a disaster,
but religion.

*

Of the ‘terrain of pure understanding’ Kant says:

This domain is an island, enclosed by nature itself within
unalterable limits. It is the land of truth — enchanting name! -
surrounded by a wide and stormy ocean, the native home of
illusion, where many a fog bank and many a swiftly melting
iceberg give the deceptive appearance of farther shores, deluding
the adventurous seafarer ever anew with empty hopes, and
engaging him in enterprises which he can never abandon and yet
is unable to carry to completion [K III 267-8],

Is not transcendental philosophy a fear of the sea? Something like a
dike or a sea-wall?

A longing for the open ocean gnaws at us, as the land is gnawed
by the sea. A dark fluidity at the roots of our nature rebels against
the security of terra firma, provoking a wave of anxiety in which we
are submerged, until we feel ourselves drowning, with representa-
tion draining away. Nihil ulterius
Incipit Kant :

We are not amphibians, but belong upon solid earth. Let us renounce all
strange voyages. The age of desire is past. The new humanity 1 anticipate has
no use for enigmatic horizons; it knows the ocean is madness and disease. Let
me still your ancient tremors, and replace them with dreams of an iron shore.

Reason in its legitimate function is a defence against the sea,
which is also an inhibition of the terrestrial; retarding our tendency
to waste painstakingly accumulated resources in futile expeditions,
a ‘barrier opposed to the expenditure of forces’ [II 332] as Bataille
describes it. It is a fortified boundary, sealing out everything
uncertain, irresolvable, dissolvant, a sea-wall against the unknown,
against death. This is a structure continuous with the great land
reclamation projects of Frederick II of Hohenstaufen: a matter of
drainage, rigorous separation of the wet and the dry, eradication of
marshes and ambiguous terrains, rigidification of the soil (‘the
mosquitos and other stinging insects that make the wilds of America
so trying for the savages, may be so many goads to urge these
primitive men to drain the marshes and bring light into the dense
forests that shut out the air, and, by so doing, as well as by the tillage
of the soil, to render their abodes more sanitary’ [K X 328]). Such



1 08 The thirst for annihilation


terrestrialism reaches its zenith in Prussia’s classic age; in the
restriction of policy to continental ambitions. It is thus characterized
by a certain hardness; a certain deliberate blindness towards death,
as towards everything that flows freely like a wound.

Unlike either Schopenhauer or Nietzsche, who in different ways
seek to place themselves outside the ambit of an Occidental history
dominated by the monotheistic order of the supreme object, and to
connect with the east Asiatic zero that contests it, Bataille seems to
resign himself to a struggle without refuge against the One. Far more
even than Nietzsche, Bataille thinks of zero as a subtraction from
One - as the death of God - and approaches it in anguish. In this
way he aligns himself with a procedure of immense influence upon
the course of European modernity, that of a progressive problem-
atization from unity, harmonized with the dissolution of sedentary
community. The most powerful example of such thinking is to be
found in the cultural heartland of capital, which is to say, in the
critical philosophy initiated by Kant.

*

Bataille ‘interrupts’ [V 29] Inner Experience in order to make a few
pages of remarks about Hinduism, in a section which ends with a
technical argument designed to reinforce his claim to be no more
interested in liberation from rebirth than in any other type of
salvation. He compares the asceticism of Hinduism to that of
Christianity, distancing himself from both in the name of excess,
and pretends to no affinity with ‘the naivety — the purity — of the
Hindu’ [V 30], Perhaps most important of all is the affirmation of
mess and inadequacy implicit in the words: ‘I do not doubt that
the Hindus go far into the impossible, but to the highest degree they
lack that which matters to me; the faculty of expression’ [V 31]. It
is because he is a writer that Bataille disdains to be a mystic. In
what he understands of the Hindu religion - and he lays claim to
no intimate knowledge of it - there is one tenet alone to which he
unconditionally subscribes: ‘[o]nly intensity matters’ [V 29].

Inner experience translates mysticism into a vagrant vocabulary at
the scurf-edge of tradition. As the initial gesture of a Summa
Atheologica, it begins amongst the ruins of God.. Echoing Celine -
that other wretched tramp of nihilism — he calls experience ‘a voyage
to the end of the possible of man’ [V 19], and thinks interiority not as
the secret recess of the self, but as a plane of contact and contagion.
The core of inner experience is not personal identity, but naked




Fanged noumenon 109


intensity, denuded even of oneself, and jutting from the refuse of
Christian dogmatics as a broken lurch into the unknown. He insists:
‘inner experience is ecstasy’ whilst ‘ecstasy is . . . communication,
opposing itself to the subsidence onto oneself’ [V 24],

It is the order of the object that organizes inner experience as
private reverie, and as a detachment from relation. Above all it is
the God of monotheism - the supreme or absolute being — which
reproduces the prison of individuation at the scale of the cosmos.
This is why the ecstasy of the unknown, which gnaws away the last
landmarks from Bataille’s voyage, contests any possible resurrec-
tion of theological edifices. As he remarks:

I hold the apprehension of God, even when formless and without
mode ... for an arrest of the movement which carries us to the
more obscure apprehension of the unknown ... [V 17].

An utter intoxication such as this is quite different from its Kantian
anticipation, although Kant too contests the right of dogmatic
theology to guide his journey:

Nothing but the sobriety of a critique, at once strict and just, can
free us from this dogmatic delusion, which through the lure of an
imagined felicity keeps so many in bondage to theories and
systems. Such a critique confines all our speculative claims
rigidly to the field of possible experience; and it does this not by
shallow scoffing at ever-repeated failures or pious sighs over the
limits of our reason, but by an effective determining of these
limits in accordance with established principles, inscribing nihil
ulterius on those Pillars of Hercules which nature herself has
erected in order that the voyage of our reason may be extended
no further than the continuous coastline of experience itself
reaches - a coast we cannot leave without venturing upon a
shoreless ocean which, after alluring us with ever-deceptive
prospects, compels us in the end to abandon as hopeless all this
vexatious and tedious endeavour [K IV 392-3],

For Kant it is not enough to have reached the ocean, the shoreless
expanse, the nihil ulterius as positive zero. He recognizes the ocean
as a space of absolute voyage, and thus of hopelessness and waste.
Only another shore would redeem it for him, and that is nowhere
to be found. Better to remain on dry land than to lose oneself in the
desolation of zero. It is for this reason that he says the ‘concept of
a noumenon is ... a merely limiting concept ’ [K IV 282].




110 The thirst for annihilation


In this way the Occidental obsession with the object consum-
mates itself in the blind passivity of its nihilism. Beyond
experience, it is suggested, there must be thought ‘an unknown
something’ [K III 283], although ‘we are unable to comprehend
how such noumena can be possible’ [K III 281], More precisely:

[The noumenon] ... is not indeed in any way positive, and is
not a determinate knowledge of anything, but signifies only the
thought of something in general, in which I abstract from
everything that belongs to the form of sensible intuition [K III
281],

That no transcendent object is found is an event which retains the
sense of a lost or absent object, rather than that of a contact with
or through objectlessness. The ocean has no sense except as a
failure of the land. Even whilst supposedly knowing nothing of the
noumenon, which, we are told, has ‘no assignable meaning’ [K III
303], one somehow still knows that it would be something other
than objectless waste without end, or the void-plane touched upon
at zero-intensity. Kant is peculiarly adamant in this respect:

[W]e cannot think of any way in which such intelligible objects
might be given. The problematic thought which leaves open a
place for them serves only, like an empty space, for the limitation
of empirical principles, without itself containing or revealing any
other object of knowledge beyond the sphere of those principles
[K III 285],

The noumenon is the absence of the subject, and is thus
inaccessible in principle to experience. If there is still a so-called
‘noumenal subject’ in the opening phase of the critical enterprise it
is only because a residue of theological reasoning conceives a
stratum of the self which is invulnerable to transition, or
synonymous with time as such. This is the ‘real’ or ‘deep’ subject,
the self or soul, a subject that sloughs-off its empirical instantiation
without impairment, the immortal subject of mortality. It only
remains for Hegel to rigorously identify this subject with death,
with the death necessitated by the allergy of Geist to its finitude, to
attain a conception of death for itself. But this is all still the absence
of the subject, even when ‘of’ is translated into the subjective
genitive, and at zero none of it makes any difference.

With Kant death finds its theoretical formulation and utilitarian
frame as a quasi-objectivity correlative to capital, and noumenon is




Fanged noumenon 1 1 1


its name. The effective flotation of this term in philosophy
coincided with the emergence of a social order built upon a
profound rationalization of excess, or rigorous circumscription of
voluptuous lethality. Once enlightenment rationalism begins its
dominion ever fewer corpses are left hanging around in public
places with each passing year, ever fewer skulls are used as paper-
weights, and ever fewer paupers perish undisturbed on the streets.
Even the graveyards are rationalized and tidied up. It is not
surprising, therefore, that with Kant thanatology undergoes the
most massive reconstruction in its history. The clerical vultures are
purged, or marginalized. Death is no longer to be culturally
circulated, injecting a transcendent reference into production, and
ensuring superterrestrial interests their rights. Instead death is
privatized, withdrawn into interiority, to flicker at the edge of the
contract as a narcissistic anxiety without public accreditation.
Compared to the immortal soul of capital the death of the
individual becomes an empirical triviality, a mere re-allocation of
stock.

In the Analytic of the Sublime in his Third Critique Kant
tentatively raises the possibility that we might taste death - even if
only through a ‘negative pleasure’ — but nowhere does he raise the
possibility that death might savage us. Even when positivized as
noumenon, death remains locked in the chain of connotations that
passes through matter, inertia, femininity, and castration, resting
in its pacified theistic sense as toothless resource and malleable
clay. There is no place, no domain, for base matter in Kant’s
thinking, since even auto-generativity in nature is conceived as a
regulative analogue of rational willing. One must first unleash the
noumenon from its determination as problematic object in order to
glimpse that between matter and death there is both a certain
identity and an intricate relation, or, in other words: a unilateral
difference appending matter to the edge of zero. Not that this
complicity has anything to do with the inertia crucial to the
mathematical idealization of matter, or with any other kind of
mechanical sterility. Matter is no more simply dead than it is simply
anything else, because simplicity is the operator of the transcen-
dent disjunction between subject and object which effaces base
materiality. The death ‘proper’ to matter is the jagged edge of its
impropriety, its teeth.

If death can bite it is not because it retains some fragment of a
potency supposedly proper to the object, but because it remains




1 12 The thirst for annihilation


uncaged by the inhibition objectivity entails. Death alone is utterly
on the loose, howling as the dark motor of storms and epidemics.
After the ruthless abstraction of all life the blank savagery of real
time remains, for it is the reality of abstraction itself that is time:
the desert, death, and desolator of all things. Bataille writes of ‘the
ceaseless slippage of everything into nothing. If one wants, time’
[V 137], and thinks of himself as ‘a tooth of TIME’ [I 558]. It
could also be said - in a more Nietzschean vein - that zero-
becoming has its metaphor in a bird of prey, for which every object
is a lamb.

Repression always fails, but nowhere is there a more florid
example of such failure than the attempt to bury death quietly on
the outskirts of the city and get down to business. Only the
encrusted historical superficies of zero are trapped in the clay,
distilling death down to its ultimate liquidity, and maximizing its
powers of infiltration. Marx notes this filtration process in Capital,
where he remarks about money/death that it ‘does not vanish on
dropping out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given
commodity. It is constantly being precipitated into new places in
the arena of circulation vacated by other commodities’ [Cap 114].
Dead labour is far harder to control than the live stuff was, which
is why the enlightenment project of interring gothic superstition
was the royal road to the first truly vampiric civilization, in which
death alone comes to rule.


*

Politics is the archaic and inadequate name for something that
must pass away into the religious history of capital. There are no
effective anti-capitalist interests, but only anti-bourgeois desires in
alliance with zero. The notorious asceticism of accumulative
Protestantism already prefigures the suicide of the last ruling class,
anticipating the definitive surrender of all humanity to death.
Marx says in the Grundrisse:

The cult of money has its asceticism, its self-denial, its self-
sacrifice - economy and frugality, contempt for mundane,
temporal and fleeting pleasures; the chase after the eternal
treasure. Hence the connection between English puritanism, or
also Dutch protestantism, and money making [Gr 232],

Weber remarks: ‘this asceticism turned with all its force against
one thing: the spontaneous enjoyment of life and all it had to offer’




Fanged noumenon 113


[PES 166]. This is the initial impulse into capital’s religious
history; the sacrifice of all dogmatic theology to the ascetic ideal,
which is finally consummated in the death of God. The theology of
the One, rooted in concrete beliefs and codes that summarize and
defend the vital interests of a community, and therefore affiliated to
a tenacious anthropomorphism, is gradually corroded down to the
impersonal zero of catastrophic religion. In its early stages capital
is still a matter of self-control, but after a couple of centuries its
rigid ethos withers away, because there is no effective self left to
resist it. To quote Weber again:

Man is dominated by the making of money, by acquisition as the
ultimate purpose of his life. Economic acquisition is no longer
subordinated to man as the means for the satisfaction of his
material needs. This reversal of what we should call the natural
relationship, so irrational from a naive point of view, is evidently
as definitely a leading principle of capitalism as it is foreign to all
peoples not under capitalistic influence. At the same time it
expresses a type of feeling which is closely connected with certain
religious ideas [PES 53].

and:

The capitalistic economy of the present day [1904-5!] is an
immense cosmos into which the individual is born, and which
presents itself to him, at least as an individual, as an unalterable
order of things in which he must live. It forces the individual, in
so far as he is involved in the system of market relationships, to
conform to capitalistic rules of action. The manufacturer who in
the long run acts counter to these norms, will just as inevitably
be eliminated from the economic scene as the worker who cannot
or will not adapt himself to them will be thrown into the streets
without a job [PES 55].

Once the commodity system is established there is no longer a need
for an autonomous cultural impetus into the order of the abstract
object. Capital attains its own ‘angular momentum’, perpetuating
a run-away whirlwind of dissolution, whose hub is the virtual zero
of impersonal metropolitan accumulation. At the peak of its
productive prowess the human animal is hurled into a new
nakedness, as everything stable is progressively liquidated in the
storm.

Bataille associates the unknown with ‘a vertiginous movement




114 The thirst for annihilation


towards the void’ [V 94] which he also describes as ‘the rending
fall into the void of the heavens’ [V 93], collapsing two themes into
each other which Kant had strained to keep apart, those of
noumenon and intensive zero. It is frequently suggested in the
writings of the immediately post-Kantian generation that Kant
illegitimately differentiates noumena from each other, and Bataille
shares a broadly Schopenhauerian impetus in his response to this
issue, but it is not until Nietzsche that the differentiation between
noumenon and zero is vigorously interrogated, and even then this
is only undertaken in a sporadic and elliptical fashion. It is first of
all Bataille, and later Deleuze, who respond to this matter with
irresistible tenacity, and thus undercut the phenomenological
stumblings that have been the more common retort to the Kantian
challenge.

Where Kant resists the conflation of noumenon from zero-
intensity, Bataille runs them convulsively into each other. All his
writings - irrespective of whether they are marked by a
predominantly literary or philosophical character - are cut-up by
oblivion, discontinuity, and incompletion. Zero alone cannot be
fragmented, divided, or partitioned — being undifferentiability
without unity - but the expense of this continuity for discrete being
is without limit:

We are not totally denuded except in going without fraudulence
to the unknown. It is the part of the unknown which gives to the
experience of God — or of poetry — their great authority. But the
unknown demands in the end an empire without division [V 17].

*

In the First Critique Kant differentiates between four divisions of
nothing, reciprocally correlated to the four classes of the categories.
These are the ens rationis or empty concept without object, the nihil
privativum or empty object of a concept, the ens imaginarium or empty
intuition without object, and the nihil negativum or empty object
without concept [K III 306-7]. It is the first of these nothingnesses
which applies to the noumenon, as Kant writes:

To the concepts of all, many, and one there is opposed the
concept which cancels everything, that is, none. Thus the object
of a concept to which no assignable intuition whatsoever
corresponds is = nothing. That is, it is a concept without an
object (ens rationis), like noumena, which cannot be reckoned




Fanged noumenon 115


among the possibilities, although they must not for that reason

be declared to be also impossible ... [K III 306].

Kant makes the indifferentiating gesture ‘= nothing’ in relation to
the noumenon, but only amongst a systematic obliteration of
illimitable zero; crushing it under the categories of the object which
— according to their four classes - stamp it with inverse features of
mathematical unity, semantic definition, substantial reciprocity,
and logical identity. It is crucial to the historical force of Bataille’s
thought of sacrifice that it contests both the general tendency of
this Kantian articulation and each of its particular elements.
Rather than sharing the features of subtraction, deprivation,
impotence, and dialectic, which Kant allots to the four aspects of
nothing, sacrifice characterizes zero as undifferentiably pre-unitary,
extravagant, unilateral, and impossible.

The noumenon is not primarily an epistemological problem, but
a religious one. Bataille writes that ‘a sort of rupture - in anguish -
leaves us at the limit of tears: thus we lose ourselves, we forget
ourselves and communicate with an ungraspable beyond’ [V 23],
When he adds that ‘the sole truth of man, finally glimpsed, is to be
a supplication without response’ [V 25], it is not being suggested
that a reference to alterity is inherent to experience in a
phenomenological fashion, but rather, that experience is immanent
to the trajectory of loss or sacrifice, in terms of which it is a real
modification or limitation. The relation of the known to the
unknown is unilateral not reciprocal, following the pattern of the
difference between restricted and general economy. Zero is
exploded into general economy, in which ‘[d]eath is in a sense a
deception’ [V 83] because there is no privacy at zero, only the
undifferentiable cosmic desert, impersonal silence, a landscape
touched upon only in the deepest abysses of inhuman affect.
‘Despair is simple’ Bataille writes, ‘it is the absence of all hope, of
every lure. It is the state of desolate expanses and - I can imagine -
of the sun’ [V 51]. This is the terrain of immanence or the
unknown; positive death as zero-intensity, unilaterally differen-
tiated from ecstasy or naked sensation. It is the whole ramshackle
complex associated with the taste of death in Bataille’s writings,
leading him to remark in Inner Experience, for instance: ‘I remain in
intolerable unknowing, which has no issue other than ecstasy itself’
[V 25],

Throughout his writings Bataille implicitly or explicitly repeats a




116 The thirst for annihilation


deft materialist gesture, indicating that transcendent dogma does
not lie in the positing of an outside to experience, but rather, in the
positing of experience as dissociated from its slide into oblivion.
Experience can never comprehend or define dissolvant immanence,
and the claim that it might can be symptomatologically interpreted
as the consequence of a utilitarian reconstruction into objectivity.
It is thus that Bataille reiterates Nietzsche’s diagnosis concerning
the moral basis of epistemology. The very possibility of a problem
about the relation between experience and the real - requiring a
theory of representation — presupposes the deformation of ex-
perience in terms of the ‘good’, or, in other words, the stable,
isolated, and determinate, correlated to the caging of noumenon in
the form of the object. In wild variance to the basic presupposition
of overt or cunning idealism, experience is not given in reality as
knowledge, but as collapse.

Just as Kant domesticates the noumenon by defining it as an
object, so he domesticates zero-intensity by conceiving it as pure
consciousness. The vestigial traces of the subject/object relation -
i.e. of epistemology - constrain the movement of inner experience
by substantializing a pole of knowing and a pole known, even at
‘pure intuition = 0’ [K III 208-9]. It is to refuse such constraint
that Bataille insists that: ‘[experience finishes by attaining the
fusion of subject and object, being unknowing subject, like
unknown object’ [V 21], and remarks of ‘oneself’ that ‘this is not
the subject isolated from the world, but a place of communication,
fusion of subject and object’ [V 21]. In this shift from the
transcendental idealist treatment of zero to that of base material-
ism there is a difference of seismic consequence. The discussion of
zero-intensity in Kant’s Schematism, for instance, is securely framed
by an immunized inner-sense, and characterized by the idealistic
structures of representation and reversibility:

Now every sensation has a degree or magnitude whereby, in
respect of its representation of an object otherwise remaining the
same, it can fill out one and the same time, that is, occupy inner
sense more or less completely, down to its cessation in
nothingness (= 0 = negatio ). There therefore. exists a relation and
connection between reality and negation, or rather a transition
from the one to the other, which makes every reality represent-
able as a quantum. The schema of a reality, as the quantity of
something insofar as it fills time, is just this continuous and




Fanged noumenon 1 1 7


uniform production of that reality in time as we successively
descend from a sensation which has a certain degree to its
vanishing point, or progressively ascend from its negation to
some magnitude of it [K III 191].

This is a particularly extreme passage, much of which he will later
qualify, accepting that ‘sensation is not in itself an objective
representation’ [K III 208], for instance, and also massively
problematizing the possibility of empty intuitions. Nevertheless,
despite all such subtilizations, Kant never swerves from his
stubborn insistence upon thinking zero in terms of the privacy of
the individuated subject. This humanist usage of the nihil privativum
is nowhere illustrated more starkly than in the words:

from empirical consciousness to pure consciousness a graduated
transition is possible, the real in the former completely vanishing
and a merely formal a priori consciousness of the manifold in
space and time remaining [K III 208],

Purity is, of course, a motif of almost inestimable importance
throughout the entirety of Kant’s critical writings. Of its many
functions there is one that can be glimpsed with particularly sharp
definition in this passage, which is that of the subjectification of
abstraction, or the sublimation of death into a power of the subject.
The extinction of the subject is floated speculatively as a
representational schema, through which thought seizes an auto-
nomy for itself over against the passivity of sensation. Kant does
not deny that pure consciousness is oblivion, death, or the subject
in itself- which is to say that it is nothing (= 0) - he simply evades
the issue, implicitly consigning it to the imagination.

Purity is a negation to the second power, through which death
de-realizes even itself. Thinking these negations bilaterally leads to
a transcendental idealism and an immaculate morality, whilst
echoing them unilaterally leads to a base materialism and a
diseased religion. On the one hand the tendency to autonomy is
soberly reinforced, on the other it is deliriously ruined. Death is
either paralysed by God or drowned in matter.

Kant is no less aware than Bataille that at issue there is a
question of continuous flow. In the Anticipations of Perception he
notes that:

The property of magnitudes by which no part of them is the
smallest possible, that is, by which no part is simple, is called




118 The thirst for annihilation


their continuity . . . Such magnitudes may be called flowing, since
the synthesis of productive imagination involved in their
production is a progression in time, and the continuity of time is
ordinarily designated by the term flowing or flowing away [K

III 211].

In the end it is the domesticated character of the Kantian notion of
time which forestalls the lurch of this thought to a base materialist
conclusion. Purity conditions the a priori, which hypostasizes time
as such, which in turn idealizes intensity. Flow as such is thus fixed
as an eternal form of representation, frozen in an endless descent to
zero. It is for this reason that Kant has an entirely ahistorical
comprehension of intensity, failing to grasp the positive order of its
repression: the inhibition of flow (continuity). In other words: he
does not raise a problem of the object with sufficient radicality to
escape from the cage of epistemology in the direction of a libidinal
or base materialism. He does not acknowledge that between the
noumenon and zero intensity there is no difference, or that neither
are susceptible to isolation. Above all, he nowhere seems to suspect
the obvious fact that zero is the primary repressed of monotheistic
cultures, so that its intensive impact is historically saturated.
Bataille digs demolitionally into the fault-lines of all these evasions
in a single comment: ‘the extreme is at the end, is nowhere except
at the end, like death’ [V 57].

*

Bataille’s break with Kantian humanism is characterized by a
ruthless exactness, as it moves sure-footedly from one fissure of
disintegration to another. Continuum is wrested definitively from
humanist containment, the order of the object is contested with a
profundity at the scale of zero, and interiority is denuded to the
point of impersonal intensity. In Method of Meditation he replies to
critics of Inner Experience :

I understand by continuum a continuous medium which is the
human collectivity, opposing itself to a rudimentary representa-
tion of indivisible and decidedly separated individuals.

The critiques that have been made of Inner Experience which
give to ‘torment’ an exclusively individual sense reveal the limit,
in relation to continuum, of the individuals which have made
them. That there exists a point of continuum where the test of
‘torment’ is inevitable, is not merely incapable of being denied,




Fanged noumenon 119


this point, situated at the extreme, defines the human being (the
continuum) [V 195].

The human animal is the one through which terrestrial excess is
haemorrhaged to zero, the animal destined to obliterate itself in
history, and sacrifice its nature utterly to the solar storm. Capital
breaks us down and reconstructs us, with increasing frequency, as
it pursues its energetic fluctuation towards annihilation, driven to
the liberation of the sun, whilst the object hurtles into the
vaporization of proto-schizophrenic commodification. By tapping
into the deep flows of history Bataille ensures that intensity is no
longer thought of as anticipated perception, but as the ecstasy of
the death of God, delirial dissolution of the One:

Above all no more object. Ecstasy is not love: love is possession to
which the object is necessary, at once possessor of the subject,
and possessed by it. There is no longer subject = object, but a
‘gaping breach’ between one and the other and, in the breach,
the subject, the object are dissolved, there is passage, com-
munication, but not from the one to the other, the one and the other
have lost distinct existence [V 74].

Desire responds to the cosmic madness pulsed out of the sun, and
slides beyond love towards utter communication. This is a final
break with Christendom, the disconnection of base flow from the
terminal sentimentalism of Western man, nihilism as nakedness
before the cyclone. Libido no longer as the energy of love, but as a
raw energy that loves only as an accident of impersonal passion.
Communion through the storm, no longer through resentment at
it. At the level of the secondary process a trickle of relief supplies
expresses the actual parsimony of the West in its relation to
Bangladesh, but at the stratum of primary desire the West is
exacerbated in its virtual generosity; in its cyclone passion (which
is not merely a passion for the cyclone).

Man differs from animal in that he is able to experience certain
sensations that wound and melt him to the core. These
sensations vary in keeping with the individual and with his
specific way of living. But, for example, the sight of blood, the
odour of vomit, which arouse in us the dread of death,
sometimes introduce us into a kind of nauseous state which hurts
more cruelly than pain. Those sensations associated with the
supreme giving-way, the final collapse, are unbearable. Are there




1 20 The thirst for annihilation


not some persons who claim to prefer death to touching an even
completely harmless snake? There seems to exist a domain where
death signifies not only decrease and disappearance, but the
unbearable process by which we disappear despite ourselves and
everything we can do, even though, at all costs, we must not
disappear. It is precisely this despite ourselves, this at all costs,
which distinguish the moment of extreme joy and of in-
describable but miraculous ecstasy. If there is nothing that
surpasses our powers and our understanding, if we do not
acknowledge something greater than ourselves, greater than we
are despite ourselves, something which at all costs must not be, then
we do not reach the insensate moment towards which we strive
with all that is in our power and which at the same time we exert
all our power to stave off [III 11].




Chapter 8


Fluent bodies
(a digression on Miller)


If now the brain and spinal cord together constitute that
corporeal being-for-self of spirit, the skull and vertebral column
form the other extreme of it, an extreme which is separated off,
viz. the solid, inert thing [Hill 246],

In order to find one’s way in a maze of this kind it is
unfortunately necessary to resume things historically. The
important thing ... is the fundamental and originary division
between two principles, spirit and matter. Insofar as that
division is established, there is, whatever one says, a superiority
of spirit over matter, and spirit harvests all conceivable
superiority, that is; on one side the divine, and on the other
reason [VII 368],

the whiteness
of the sea

and the paleness of the light
concealed the bones [III 369].

To revert to a na'ive question: what ‘is’ matter? Is it possible that
we could receive a message that could respond to this interroga-
tion? There is an anthropocentric conception of messages as
transmissions between beings that share a code. According to such
a definition the reception of a message depends upon a prior
agreement with the sender. One can receive messages from other
humans, or from personal beings such as God or angels, as long as
there is a pre-established system of significations. If a message is
not coded according to the rules of a familiar system it might still
be possible to translate it into the terms of such a system,
deciphering or interpreting it. It is thus possible for messages to be
retrieved from extinct languages, as long as sufficient similarity





1 22 The thirst for annihilation


exists between them and familiar languages for a systematic series
of correspondences to be established. Such similarities can be
described as the ‘formal’ or ‘structural’ properties of the signifying
system, distinguished from its ‘material’ or ‘empirical’ instantia-
tion.

Methods of structural analysis have the great ‘advantage’ that
they are able to exclude extraneous aspects from consideration,
ignoring everything except for the formal relations between the
terms - signifiers - of the message. The densely encrustated matter
of historical associations, which is the impurity inherent in real
transmission, can be washed away from the message like the mud
from a fossil. One need not be prejudiced about where the text
came from. As for the formal relations that remain; they are also a
matter of exclusion: this time the exclusion each term operates
upon the others, sublimating itself into a transcendent unity, a
pure nexus of articulation.

Developments in the technology of information have lent
urgency and concreteness to the study of codes. Techniques have
arisen for the translation of messages into codes built out of a single
alternative (bilaterized and reciprocal) of ‘one’ and ‘zero’. These
are digital codes, according to which messages can be generated by
the presence/absence (flow/blockage) of an electric current. Such
codes are readily adaptable to machines which can transmit, store,
and operate upon information of a logical and mathematical kind,
since decimal numbers can be converted into digital ones, and
logical functions are easily reproduced by ‘logic gates’. With an
appropriate coding system any system of symbols can be allotted
its digital equivalent; a series of binary digits (‘bits’) adequate to
specify it. A precise quantitative determination can be given for the
minimal length for sequences of bits required to recode an alphabet
of symbols tv. log 2 n.

*

Bataille exhibits no positive interest in the philosophies of structure
(to which he was, in any case, scarcely exposed). Like the
thermodynamicists and information theorists his concerns lay not
with the analysis of discontinuity, but with its explanation, or
rather, with the genealogy of its cultural presupposition. Far from
being a possible content of articulated signs, Bataille’s matter is
that which must be repressed as the condition of articulation,
whereby immanent continuity is vivisected in transcendence. The




Fluent bodies 123


importance of structural thought is real, but symptomatological;
incarnating matter’s positive effacement by utilitarian sociality. In
a short early text called Architecture he writes:

each time that architectural composition is found elsewhere than in
monuments, whether this is in physionomy, costume, music or
painting, one is able to infer a taste for authority, whether human
or divine. The great compositions of certain painters express the
will to constrain the spirit to an official ideal. The disappearance
of academic construction in painting is, on the contrary, the
open road to the expression (and thus even to exultation) in the
pychological processes most incompatible with social stability. It
is this that explains in large part the lively reactions provoked for
over half a century by the progressive transformation of painting,
up to then characterized by a sort of dissimulated architectural
skeleton [I 171].

Structure, bilateral articulation, reciprocal exclusion, and deter-
minate negation all belong to bones and not to soft tissues. That
structure comes to the fore is a matter of the momentary dominion
of the profane:

For primitive people the moment of greatest anguish is the phase
of decomposition; when the bones are bare and white they are
not intolerable as the putrefying flesh is, food for worms [X 59].

*

The ahistorical, descriptive, and normalizing study of language
usage is pragmatics, which can be contrasted with the historical,
epidemic, and aberrational experiments in flow summarized as
‘libidinal-’ or ‘base materialism’. Base materialism is the plague of
unilateral difference, which is a difference that only operates from
out of the undifferentiated. Thinking of this kind is flagrantly
inconsistent with the principle of identity. The aberrant phenom-
ena summarized under the label ‘spirit’, for instance, are spiritually
differentiated from matter, whilst remaining materially undifferen-
tiated from it. Similarly, culture is only culturally different from
nature, such that the most strenuous deviations from nature leave
nature uninterrupted. The human animal rebels unilaterally
against its animality, just as life differentiates itself against and
within the undifferentiable desert of death. A unilateral difference
is the simultaneity of a tendency to separation and a persistence of




1 24 The thirst for annihilation


continuity, which is a thought that cannot be grasped, but only
succumbed to in delirium. For any ardent materialism truth is
madness.

The dominant tendencies in philosophy are complicit with
ordinary language in their supression of unilateral differences, and
their insistence upon bilateral or reciprocal relations. Because
separation is normally thought of as mutual discontinuity, the
world is interpreted as an aggregate of isolated beings, which are
extrinsically amalgamated into structures, systems, and societies.
Such thinking precludes in principle all possibility of base contact
or communion.

Spawned by unilateral difference, the human animal is a hybrid
of sentience and pathology; or of differentiated consistency with
matter. Knowing that its community with nature sucks it into
psychosis and death mankind valorizes its autonomy, whilst
cursing the tidal desires that tug it down towards fusional
dissolution. Morality is thus the distilled imperative to autonomous
integrity, which brands as evil the impulse to skinless contact and
the merging of bodies.

Base materialism is compelled to acknowledge that Henry Miller
is a ‘saint’ [XI 46], and that the Tropic of Cancer is a sacred book.

*

To an important degree Miller’s Tropic of Cancer responds to the
surrealist culture of 1930s’ Paris, especially to the creative practice
of ‘automatic writing’ which entangles literature with sexuality in a
guerrilla struggle against repression. The stylistic infelicities and
thematic confusions of his writing are inextricable from its force as
a seismic upheaval in the history of literature, stemming as they do
from his passionate rebellion against the normative regulations of
aesthetic and moral censorship. It is precisely the jagged and
meandering character of this text that attest to its torrential
emancipatory energy; liberating writing from the pedantic bour-
geois delicacies that cage literature in the prison of the ego. In the
opening pages he insists that: ‘I have made a compact with myself
not to change a line of what I write. I am not interested in
perfecting my thoughts, nor my actions’ [TC 19]. The unconscious
does not coo sweet lyrics or unroll immaculate and measured
prose, it howls and raves like the shackled and tortured beast that
our civilization has made of it, and when the fetters are
momentarily loosened the unconscious does not thank the ego for




Fluent bodies 125


this meagre relief, but hisses, spits, and bites, as any wild thing
would.

This is not to suggest that Miller is without inhibition. He is, for
instance, notorious for his misogyny. It is obvious to anyone
reading his books that women frighten him. It is not mere fear that
grips him but anxiety; terror of nothing, the horror that patriarchy
interprets in terms of castration. Who is in a position to condemn
him for this hesitancy at the brink of dissolution? Is it not rather
the nakedness of his avowal that triggers an inane and moralistic
response? Phallus is the great security of male-dominated culture,
and beyond it lies an ocean of loss as desolate as zero. Miller
writes: ‘if they knew they were thinking about nothing they would
go mad’ [TC 82]. He quotes his friend Van Norden’s anguished
comments on the vulva: ‘It’s an illusion! You get all burned up
about nothing . . . All that mystery about sex and then you
discover that it’s nothing - just a blank’ [TC 144—5], His own
response is different:

When I look down into that crack I see an equation sign, the
world at balance, a world reduced to zero and no trace of
remainder. Not the zero on which Van Norden turned his
flashlight, not the empty crack of the prematurely disillusioned
man, but an Arabian zero rather, the sign from which spring
endless mathematical worlds, the fulcrum which balances the
stars and the light dreams and the machines lighter than air and
the lightweight limbs and the explosives that produced them
[TC 249],

Upon zero or utter continuity everything flows without resistance.
There is no possibility of becoming settled, rooted, or established,
of instituting stable communities or codes. Names and labels
regress to the magmic-pulse of language, sliding in useless
digression. According to Freud kissing is included amongst the
perversions because it digresses from procreative sexuality, wan-
dering erratically across the cosmic desolation of the unconscious.
Zero is the vortex of a becoming inhuman that lures desire out
from the cage of man onto the open expanses of death. Not that
death as utter digression is the same as the becoming inert of the
body. It is first of all the anegoic psychosis of communicative
fusion; floating on the far side of all effort.

There are times when Miller, confronted by the oceanic blank of
zero, falls back upon the spurious identity of bones, which he




126 The thirst for annihilation


associates with Phallic rigidity: ‘Animals with a bone in the penis.
Hence, a bone on ... “Happily”, says Gourmont, “the bony
structure is lost in man.” Happily? Yes, happily. Think of the
human race walking around with a bone on’ [TC 11]. Which
doesn’t prevent him remarking two pages later that ‘[t]here is a
bone in my prick six inches long’ [TC 13]. A corpse has one pre-
eminent and historically fateful heterogeneous distribution: that
between its skeletal structure and its soft tissues. This is
apprehended as a difference between what is perdurant, dry, clean,
formal, and what is volatile, wet, dirty, and formless. On the basis
of this resource Western civilization has been not merely
thanatological, but osseological, which is something reaching
beyond the fascination with the skeleton - and particularly the
skull - that is distributed extremely widely across cultures.
Osseology, in its deep sense, is the usage of the difference between
the hard and soft parts of the body as a logical operator in the
discourse on matter and death. For instance, differentiation
between eternal form and perishable substance, celestial purity and
terrestrial filth, divine architecture and base flow. The skeleton is
thus conceived of as an invisible harmonious essence, an
infrastructure beneath the disturbing tides of soft pathology. It is
the prototype of intelligible form, contrasted with the decaying
mass of the sensible body.

The skeleton is the relatively dead part of an organism, and
because of this it is also the part relatively immune to dissolution.
Which is another way of saying that the hard parts of an organic
body are those most isolated from the communicative general-
economic flows of its metabolism, but also the parts it most
faithfully transmits into the future. The residues of life follow upon
a pre-emptive compromise with death; what remains of life is only
the disloyal part of itself.

The grimacing skeleton that invaded the iconography of the late
Middle Ages seems to have been unknown to Greco-Roman
antiquity. On the other hand, the cult of the skull goes back to
Peking man (440,000 to 220,000 BC). Veneration for skulls is to
be found in all primitive religions as well as in all the great
religions of antiquity. Cortez’s Spaniards, counting the skull-
trophies in Mexican temples, found 136,000. The Toltecs cut ofT
the skulls and used them as bowls. The Gauls cut off the heads




Fluent bodies 127


of their dead enemies and brought them back to their villages,
suspended from the necks of their horses, then nailed them as
trophies in front of their houses. In New Caledonia widows kept
the skulls of their husbands in baskets [SD 10-11].

There is something treacherous about a skull, that most intimate
companion, so indifferently adapted to an inorganic regime, so
untouched by the disappearance of flesh. It is the natural emblem
of piracy, criminality, and cold betrayal. Perhaps everybody
occasionally imagines their skull become a paperweight, or (less
modestly) a museum exhibit in some distant time. Such thoughts
are a little more cynical than those which capture it shortly after
interment; a chamber of heaving maggots and filth. One only
glimpses its calcic imperviousness by imaginatively stripping it of
our rot, ageing it tastefully, polishing it. In the end one comes to
feel that it merely tolerates its momentary participation in us,
numbly awaiting the cessation of our tedious biological clamour.

Clearer than all I see my own grinning skull, see the skeleton
dancing in the wind, serpents issuing from the rotted tongue and
the bloated pages of ecstasy slimed with excrement. And I join
my slime, my excrement, my madness, my ecstasy to the great
circuit which flows through the subterranean vaults of the flesh.
All the unbidden, unwanted, drunken vomit will flow on
endlessly through the minds of those to come in the inexhaust-
ible vessel that contains the history of the race. Side by side with
the human race there runs another race of beings, the inhuman
ones, the race of artists who, goaded by unknown impulses, take
the lifeless mass of humanity and by the fever and ferment with
which they imbue it turn this soggy dough into bread and the
bread into wine and the wine into song. Out of the dead compost
and the inert slag they breed a song that contaminates. I see this
other race of individuals ransacking the universe, turning
everything upside down, their feet always moving in blood and
tears, their hands always empty, always clutching and grasping
for the beyond, for the god out of reach: slaying everything
within reach in order to quiet the monster that gnaws at their
vitals. I see that when they tear their hair with the effort to
comprehend, to seize this forever unattainable, I see that when
they bellow like crazed beasts and rip and gore, I see that this is
right, that there is no other path to pursue. A man who belongs
to this race must stand up on the high place with gibberish in his




1 28 The thirst for annihilation


mouth and rip out his entrails. It is right and just, because he
must! And anything that falls short of this frightening spectacle,
anything less shuddering, less terrifying, less mad, less intoxi-
cated, less contaminating, is not art. The rest is counterfeit. The
rest is human. The rest belongs to life and lifelessness [TC
255-6],

Washing about the rigid parts of the body are the swirls of ecstasy
and filth whose only fidelity is to zero. Not that rigidity and fluidity
enter into any kind of opposition within a structure or dialectic.
There is no elemental duality at stake here, since this would
involve a rigid difference transcending and dominating its terms, as
if a typology, signifying system, or patchwork of language-games
were extrinsically organizing base flows, in the manner of
Wittfogel’s hydraulic bureaucracies 12 . The savage truth of delirium
is that all ossification - far from being a metaphysical separation
from decay — is a unilateral deviation from fluidity, so that even
bones, laws, and monuments are crumbled and swept away by the
deep flows of the Earth. Far from establishing an eternal logos on
the model of pure ossification, the tongue rots into a delirial
meander of oozing slime and dirt, indistinguishable from the
contaminating mess it vomits into the gutters of literature.

There is a boundary of sorts along the banks and shores of the
body where fluidity and rigidity meet, but this is not sufficient to
authorize the irrigational idol of rigid differentiation. It is not difficult
to imagine how such an idol might have arisen, of course. Is it not
natural to imagine rigidity setting the terms for its contestation? It
is almost tautological to conceive liquidity as giving way. Never-
theless, differentiation is contested at the scurf-edge of the flow,
where sediments of detritus are tugged problematically between
solidity and liquification. If fluidity prevails the bank is dissolved,
washed away, permeated, flooded; it is only in the momentary
constraint of fluids that the fixed channels of an irrigation are
realized. However desperately Miller clings at times to his bones,
to his bone on, to the mouldering patriarchal infrastructure of his
corpse, in the end there is infiltration and collapse into the deluge,
into the unsurpassable hydraulic mega-machine: ‘I am a writing
machine. The last screw has been added. The thing flows. Between
me and the machine there is no estrangement. I am the machine
. . .’ [TC 34],




Fluent bodies 129


Speaking philosophically, and in accord with common sense, flow
is gauged in terms of a fixed grid assembled from space, time, and
matter. Flow displaces mass in space over time in a strictly
quantifiable fashion, and is therefore - as a concept - posterior to the
apparatus of its representation. Not only does time function as a
dimension of its description, but a deeper temporal prioritization of
the representational grid (whether this is idealized or naturalized)
locates flow as an empirical content, mapped along axes achieved in
advance. Becoming is subordinated to a transcendent law, allowing
it to be judged, denigrated, and condemned. Compare Miller’s
words:

For the fraction of a second perhaps I experienced the utter
clarity which the epileptic, it is said, is given to know. In that
moment I lost completely the illusion of time and space: the
world unfurled its drama simultaneously along a meridian which
had no axis. In this sort of hair-trigger eternity I felt that
everything was justified, supremely justified; I felt the wars
inside me that had left behind this pulp and wrack; I felt the
crimes that were seething here to emerge tomorrow in blatant
screamers; I felt the misery that was grinding itself out with
pestle and mortar, the long dull misery that dribbles away in
dirty handkerchiefs. On the meridian of time there is no
injustice: there is only the poetry of motion creating the illusion
of truth and drama [TC 102].

Even ordinarily time is thought of as a flow, but flows characterize
the repressed of thinking. That time is conceived as a river,
streaming dissymmetrically from the future into the past, is a
representation controlled by a defensive system, simultaneous with
mature patriarchy, nucleated upon the ego, and correlated with the
generation of a utilitarian hydraulics. A transcendent differentia-
tion rigidifies a stabilized subject/object couple or appropriate
synonym; the former as a fixed point of apprehension, the latter as
an underlying essence. This double deliquification channels a
quantifiable homogeneous substance through a rigid conduit; the
transcendent apparatus of time as such and the ego, ontology as
managed flow.

Nothing of this pompous monolithic architecture can resist the
torrent of Miller’s prose when it surges most ruthlessly out of zero:

Yes, I said to myself, I too love everything that flows: rivers,




130 The thirst for annihilation


sewers, lava, semen, blood, bile, words, sentences. I love the
amniotic fluid when it spills out of the bag. I love the kidney
with its painful gall-stones, its gravel and what-not; I love the
urine that pours out scalding and the clap that runs endlessly; I
love the words of hysterics and the sentences that flow on like
dysentery and mirror all the sick images of the soul; I love the
great rivers like the Amazon and the Orinoco, where crazy men
like Moravagine float on through dream and legend in an open
boat and drown in the blind mouths of the river. I love
everything that flows, even the menstrual flow that carries away
the seed unfecund. I love scripts that flow, be they hieratic,
esoteric, perverse, polymorph, or unilateral. I love everything
that flows, everything that has time in it and becoming, which
brings us back to the beginning where there is never end: the
violence of the prophets, the obscenity that is ecstasy, the
wisdom of the fanatic, the priest with his rubber litany, the foul
words of the whore, the spittle that floats away in the gutter, the
milk of the breast and the bitter honey that pours from the
womb, all that is fluid, melting, dissolute and dissolvent, all the
pus and dirt that in flowing is purified, that loses its sense of
origin, that makes the great circuit towards death and
dissolution [TC 258-9].

Between the body and the utterances that traverse it there is not in
truth a relation, but rather a repressed continuity. Literature
surges and foams wherever bodies diffuse, vomit themselves, melt
into each other, and subside into the heaving toxic syrup of solar
tides. It does not stem from the architectural design of a
transcendent author-god, imprisoned in rigid individuation, but
accumulates black and excremental, like a rich silt at the edge of
the great impersonal flows. ‘Looking into the Seine I see mud and
desolation’ [TC 70], If intense literature seems very often to have
an autobiographical character — as with Miller - this is not
primarily because a life expresses itself, it is far more a matter of an
integrated life being haemorrhaged into the laceration of writing,
rhythmically dishevelled and coagulated down to an impermanent
clotting in the subterranean lava-flows of base culture. ‘And when
you show me a man who expresses himself perfectly,’ writes Miller,
‘I will not say that he is not great, but I will say that I am
unattracted’ [TC 254], To describe Miller as a writer is not to lend
him a personal integrity as one who writes, but to scatter the ashes




Fluent bodies 131


of his name into the rivers of fluent textuality which nag all
personalities to pieces, as they bear their luxuriant froth of words
downstream towards chaos and death. ‘I feel this river flowing
through me,’ remarks Miller in the penultimate sentence of the
book [TC 318].

None of this has anything to do with metaphor. Metaphor is
only an issue where literal and figurative usages can be bilaterally
distinguished, where orthodox functions have been diked-up
against the currents of digression. To write of the body being
traversed by rivers is not mere metaphor, except when the body
has been penned into its solidity and rivers have been degraded to
drainage ditches. However many rivers have been integrated into
urban and industrial sewerage systems, there are still solar rivers,
pathological rivers, rivers of sex, madness, literature, and plague
which refuse to slumber wretchedly within their banks. The word
‘river’ in its ordinary usage is an instrument of irrigationist
repression, and its aberrant upsurge is not metaphor, but
catastrophic erosion.

For so long as we persist as dammed-up reservoirs of labour-
power we preserve our humanity, but the rivers flowing into us are
an irresistible urge to dissolution, pressing us into the inhumane.
Beneath the regulated exchanges of words we howl and gnaw at
our fettered limbs. An impersonality as blank and implacable as
the sun wells up beneath us, a vermin-hunger for freedom:

If I am inhuman it is because my world has slopped over its
human bounds, because to be human seems like a poor, sorry,
miserable affair, limited by the senses, restricted by moralities
and codes, defined by platitudes and isms [TC 257].

Humanity is a petrified fiction hiding from zero, a purgatorial
imprisonment of dissolution, but to be stricken with sanctity is to
bask in death like a reptile in the sun.

God is dead, but immeasurably more importantly, God is death
(except ‘God’ means the fascist ass-hole of the West). The
beginning of the secret is that death (= 0) is immense.

*

From birth we are brain-washed into conformity with the cage,
taught to accumulate, to shore ourselves up, to fear madness and
death. Trapped in a constricting tangle of language routines we
tread a narrow circuit in the maze




132 The thirst for annihilation


We are told that chance will not take care of us, and that it is
difficult to live

but work and seriousness are slums of delusion

the garbage-heap of individuation has no worth

what is called life at the outer edge of patriarchy is a bleak box of

lies, drudgery, and anaesthesia blended with inane agony

what matters about the outside of the box is not just that it is the

outside of the box, but that it is immense

what matters is the abyss, the gulf

*

They want us to fear death so much, but we can inhabit it like
vermin, it can be our space, in our violent openness to the sacred
death will protect us against their exterminations, driven insane by
zero, we can knot ourselves into the underworld, communicate
through it, cook their heavenly city in our plague,
we can scamper in and out of the maze in a way they cannot
understand,

during the first weekend of June
at half-past one on Sunday morning
deep in the crypt of the night
together with a fellow voyager in madness
i crossed the line into death

which is called Hell because the police control heaven

*

Melting shells drunk on our inexistence
torched in the flame of the sacred

we trudged though the burnt and blackened swamps of the
shallows

testing the edge of the estuary
dripping brimstone from our boots

an immense ocean of annihilation stretched out before us

*

There has been a revolution in Hell
Satan hangs from a gibbet and rots
wreathed in the howls of anarchy
out there beyond the stars

the cold wind of zero rages without interdiction




Chapter 9


Aborting the human race


[M]an is by nature a political animal. He who is stateless by
nature and not just by chance is either subhuman or
superhuman, like the man reviled by Homer as ‘classless,
lawless, hearthless’; for being naturally without a state, he is a
lover of war and may be compared to an unprotected piece in a
game of draughts [Pol 7].

Perceived under the perspective of action, Nietzsche’s work is an
abortion . . . [VI 22].

There is a sense in which Bataille’s works - as works - are not
especially ‘difficult’. They are, indeed, no more problematic than
the words we use to tranquillize ourselves against love and dying
(against the passion to die). One could very easily ‘understand’
Bataille whilst protracting a decent and productive life. There is
even a necessity to do this, which it would be hypocritical to
wholly disown. One might avoid being merely interested in these
texts, yet it is still possible that the agitation which remained
would be dissolved into those little lazinesses and indecencies with
which we meagrely spice our domesticity. It is for this reason
(reason itself) that I feel I understand Bataille’s obsessiveness, his
repetition, his reluctance to leave us with what has already been
so clearly said. It is for this reason too that any book making it
easier to understand Bataille is written contra him. The gurus of
writing will of course say that we should be quite without regard
for ‘Bataille’, as if the failure of authorialism were properly
replaced by a textualist triumph. After all, who would not rather
be faced with a life or a production, when the alternative to either
is wreckage? How uselessly cruel it is then to suggest that
Bataille’s repetition is a scream provoked by what becomes its





134 The thirst for annihilation


own meaninglessness, and, less even than this, an echoing
involution into abortion.

Bataille does not repeat out of a fear that he has been
misunderstood, quite the contrary. It is precisely because what he
has written might merely be understood that it must perpetually be
re-insisted. His thinking is not without a frightening simplicity. It
is perhaps even reducible to one question: what is an end?

Humans like to have two ends, and to keep them as distinct as
possible; blessing telos and cursing terminus. In this respect a certain
zenith is reached in the Kantian practical postulate of immortality,
where the perfection of teleological process requires the infinite
recession of extinction. One end supplants the other. We are all
kantians now (I use the small case advisedly) and it has come to
seem almost natural that our history be comprehended as
teleological. It is only since Nietzsche that it has come to seem
(immanently) terminal.

Repetition can no doubt be accused of wrecking the progression
of an oeuvre. To repeat is a sign that one has ‘lost the thread’, and
beginning again is the abjection proper to discourse; collapse
(violent detumescence?), sentience as return from oblivion. The
writer, drunk (if only upon the literary malaise), cannot even
remember the contents of the crumpled pages strewn about the
waste bin, or the previous paragraph, the previous book, the
previous anything. No adequate attempt is made at recovery. The
past stinks in its decomposition. One begins again.

What is an end? One shudders perhaps. An end? Are there more
than one? Is not the very question a violation of sorts? A ruthless
denuding? Should death be pushed so harshly into my awareness?
Can she not wait? Is it not permissible to sleep?

If life were a discourse death could wait, but dreams break
down, there is repetition. Bataille’s text does not anticipate death;
it fractures seismically under the impact of oblivion. Each of its
waves are broken recollections of the taste of death. Each
beginning again — as such and irrespective of its inherent
signification — moves under the influence of an unanticipated
dying. Waves have no memory. They react afresh each time to the
deep ebb that undoes them in darkness, beating to a pulse that
eludes them. The absent shingle-hiss of death is discursively
manipulated into textual regularity, but this does not erase the
multiple beginnings again; marking the contour of each retraction
into silence. ‘[SJomething inside me undid itself’ [IV 342], says the




Aborting the human race 135


anonymous narrator of a short fragment beginning: ‘At the start of
the degeneration . .

*

What do you want to make of your life? A cruel question, when it is
not a naive one. What is a life if not a definitive unmaking?
Whatever the gibberings of profane man, it is not open to us to
make anything of ourselves.

*

Telos lends itself to discourse, whilst even the silence of terminus is
effaced. Death has no advocates. Even those who align themselves
with her do so for other reasons; extreme suffering - for instance -
has no end of commentators, each desperate for a pact with the
Great Silence. This advantage accruing to survival when it comes
to putting one’s case is a banal prejudice, but no less an effective
one for that. Theoretical biology has been based on nothing else for
over a century. Survival will always have rigged any conceivable
tribunal, but surely we can agree (Nietzsche laughs) that
inevitability is not justice?

In the end - one no longer denies it — there is death, but for the
moment one has . . . other ends? There must surely be other ends.
Man as an end in himself? We have that of course, some would say
we have considerably too much of it. Since zoology has matured
enough to adopt its most aberrant specimen - the perverse animal
- it is difficult for us not to see preposterous claims to a unique
human dignity as a slander against nature. Nevertheless, is it not
possible to precipitate the principle of our humanism, distill it
down to goodness? Who could be so impudent as to seek something
other than goodness? This is surely the very essence of the end, the
absolute end, gleaming magnificently in its Platonic rendition: The
Good. How touchingly naive this word sounds today.

The Good is the object of rationalized desire, of what had
become, by the end of the eighteenth century, Wille, will. The word
our economists eventually settled for is preference , those with more of
an ideological bent tend to prefer choice. Even after being winkled
by psychology from its Platonic niche in the celestial order, the
good is still indispensable to concrete reason, as its end and
orientation. The good is exactly what - upon reflection - we want.
At least, it is what we should want; the intelligibility of educated
desire. Our civilization has deluged us with ‘goods’, at least in its




136 The thirst for annihilation


metropolitan heights. Yet, as Freud suggests, we remain discon-
tented by civilization, gnawed by Unbehagen. The problem with
goodness is less its maldistribution than the fact it is so
depressingly tedious. We applaud Mother Theresa without
reservation, before succumbing to our yawns (longing for her to be
arraigned for a sex-crime, or for a war to break out). Perhaps all
righteousness is on the side of the good, but as to the ‘good life’,
wouldn’t it be somewhat better to be dead?

Since Schopenhauer in modern times (but already with
Augustine) all those who have thought at all about the matter have
known that we do not in the slightest want the good. The good is
exactly what we don’t want, that which is set against our wanting,
a barrier, a renunciation. Even the few beleaguered Aristotelians
who survive have long since ceased to speak of desire, preferring
‘virtue’ (the way to a good life no doubt, but one that leaves us
perfectly indifferent, or perhaps mildly nauseous). Faced with the
option of working towards an ethical community or stealing an
illicit kiss we might choose the path of duty, but we would not
pretend to be furthering our beatitude.

Argument is no longer necessary to contend that desire is an
amoral savagery, there is near unanimity about it, usually in the
form of an implicit ego-psychology which acknowledges stoically
that sexuality will always be with us, even though it makes us ill.
Nevertheless, it is still the case that the fact no one wants what is
‘good for us’ disturbs us less than it might. What slight
perturbation it does cause is usually interpreted as a need for a
harsher or more insidious moralization, for more education, greater
ideological penetration, a larger police force. When we scare
ourselves our sympathies always seem to lie with the passive
subject, and not with the wild beast.

Kant remarks in The Critique of Judgement-.

As the single being upon earth that possesses understanding,
and, consequently, a capacity for setting before himself ends of
his deliberate choice, he is titular lord of nature, and, supposing
we regard nature as a teleological system, he is born to be its
ultimate end. But this is always on the terms that he has the
intelligence and the will to give to it and to himself such a
reference to ends as can be self-sufficing independently of nature,
and, consequently, a final end. Such an end, however, must not
be sought in nature [K X 389],




Aborting the human race 137


‘An end that must not be sought in nature’ could mean at least two
things. It might, as Kant would no doubt prefer, indicate a distinct
ontological stratum - the ‘supersensible’ - which would be the
reserve of ends. Alternatively, it might simply suggest that nature
has ends, and of such a kind that far from ends ‘being’ in some way
different from that of nature, being, in nature, comes to an end. For
what is it that ‘man’ understands, if it is not that nature brings
‘him’ to an end? The human animal has a unique potentiality to
not only die with utter futility, but to infiltrate its hypertrophic
terminus into the most effervescent currents of natural becoming.
Since homo sapiens has prowled the earth, nature has adapted to new
shadows.


*

However else it is possible to divide Western thinking, one fissure
can be teased-open separating the theo-humanists — croaking
together in the cramped and malodorous pond of Anthropos - from
the wild beasts of the impersonal. The former are characterized by
their moral fervour, parochialism, earnestness, phenomenological
disposition, and sympathy for folk superstition, the latter by their
fatalism, atheism, strangely reptilian exuberance, and extreme
sensitivity for what is icy, savage, and alien to mankind. Nietzsche
is perhaps the greatest of all anti-humanist writers. At the very
least, his writings attest to the most powerful eruption of
impersonality in the Occidental world since it was rotted by the
blight of the Nazarene. It is possible that Herakleitus was more
effortlessly inhuman, and that — beneath the shadow of the cross —
Spinoza and Sade occasionally reach a comparable pitch of anegoic
coldness, but nowhere outside Nietzsche’s texts is there an
antipersonalistic war-machine of equivalent ferocity.

It is deliberate ignorance or idiocy in respect of Schopenhauer
that allows humanist readings of Nietzsche to proliferate so
shamelessly; readings in which a so-called ‘superman’ prefigures an
existential choice for mankind, in which eternal recurrence is a
personal — or even ethical - predicament, in which affirmation is an
act of voluntary consent, will to power is a psychological
description of self-assertion, and values are subjectively legislated
idealities.

It should not be necessary to explicitly recollect that, on the
basis of his reading of Schopenhauer, Nietzsche assumed the
unconsciousness and impersonality of will or desire, and never




138 The thirst for annihilation


indicates a regression to a Kantian/humanist understanding of this
matter. Nor should it be necessary to re-assert the intrinsic
connection between the will and the transcendental problematic of
time, inherited from the same source. The same could be said
about the obvious reference to Schopenhauer exhibited in the very
expression ‘will to power’, the Schopenhauerian germ for the
thought of ‘rank-order’ in that of ‘grades of objectification’, the
architectonic connection between Schopenhauer and Nietzsche in
terms of the history of philosophy, the crucial Schopenhauerian
background to Nietzsche’s remarks about women, etc. Nietzsche’s
break with Schopenhauer is of extreme profundity, but it remains a
break with Schopenhauer, rather than some kind of ahistorical
existential inspiration.

If stressing the importance of Schopenhauer to the entire sweep
of Nietzsche’s writing were merely to polemicize on behalf of
elementary standards of scholarship it would be a piece of
academicist moralism of the shoddiest sort. The crucial issue is not
that reading Nietzsche without reference to Schopenhauer gets
Nietzsche wrong, but that it makes him more humane. Schopen-
hauer is the great well-spring of the impersonal in post-Kantian
thought; the sole member of the immediately succeeding generation
to begin vomiting monotheism out of their cosmology in order to
attack the superstition of self. The repression of Schopenhauer’s
thinking is continuous with the co-option of Nietzsche back into the
monotheistic/humanistic fold of ontologically grounded subjects,
real choices, existential individuation, irreducible persons, ethical
norms, and suchlike garbage. Whether or not some kind of
tentative antihumanism is then launched on the basis of a quasi-
phenomenological or deconstructive gesture is scarcely a matter
worthy of great excitement, except .for those concerned to choose
between Luther and the pope.

*

That finality has been an overt issue throughout the history of
modern philosophy has been mainly due to the struggle against the
Aristotelian tendencies of scholasticism by the thinkers of the
Enlightenment. It is because of this history that finality is normally
conceived in terms of an opposition between teleology and
mechanism, or between final and efficient causation, since this
distinction is the seventeenth and eighteenth century battle-front
between the church and modern science. Finality was associated




Aborting the human race 139


above all with the teleological argument for the existence of God -
the argument from design — according to which nature is open
to theological interpretation as the approximation to a divine
blueprint.

For Aristotle the theological dimension of teleology is closely
bound to its libidinal dimension, since desire is understood as a
tendency towards an intrinsic perfection whose ultimate keystone
is the sufficiency of God. The telos or goal of all striving is
something presupposed by activity, such that desire must already
have received its potential for realization extrinsically, thus
preserving the Platonic association between Eros and subordina-
tion. Both the Aristotelian and scholastic usage of teleology is
dependent upon the thought of originary perfection or God,
subordinating desire to the sufficiency of complete being. In other
words, theological time is encompassed by perfection or absolute
achievement, which enslaves becoming to a timeless potential of
that which becomes. Such a potential is a design, archetype, or
plan, existing ideally and eternally in the supreme intellect, and
usurping all creativity from nature.

For those familiar with the general tenor of Kant’s attempt to
harmonize the competing ideologies of established authority and
progress, the predominant character of his response to the problem
of finality will be something less than shocking. The combination of
theoretical agnosticism and practical apologetics, which he employs
in the first two critiques in order to legitimate a responsible space
for science alongside instituted power, is still operative in the third.
The potential of the theologians is smuggled into the Critique of
Judgement as the possibility of a complete system of science, a
regulative idea which derives from the originary perfection of
reason. Even though teleology loses its right to dogmatic
theorizing, it continues to guide the thought of nature in terms of
the infinitely accomplished idea.

In order not to inhibit the development of the sciences Kant de-
naturalizes teleology, lodging its redoubt in his practical philo-
sophy, and therefore in reason. A rational being or person is to be
practically conceived not as a natural entity - a delirious clot of
matter - but as an end in itself; imbued a priori with a potential for
perfect goodness that is only sullied by the pathological factors of
its animal existence. The realization of the human perfection that is
embryonically presupposed by reason is the endless task of
morality, wherein process approximates to the timeless form of its




140 The thirst for annihilation


utter accomplishment. It is thus that, like Plato, Aristotle, and the
church, Kant thinks of goodness as perfectly instituted in advance,
as a supersensibly derived potential.

Schopenhauer seeks to extricate the thought of finality from this
theological framework, but his success is strictly limited. Although
he eradicates the theological dogma of originary intellect from his
philosophy he continues to rely on the notion of Platonic Ideas to
interpret natural processes, and thus succumbs in turn to the
finalist doctrine of potential, in the form of a Kantian transcenden-
tal perfectionism. Schopenhauer, too, deprives desire of creativity,
by conceiving all its possible consequences as eternal potentialities
of the noumenal will. Desire as the will to life is merely the
perpetual re-instantiation of pre-given forms.

Despite the problems to which he succumbs, Schopenhauer’s
philosophy makes a number of important advances, by initiating a
war against the intellectualist interpretation of will, beginning the
rigorous separation of affective intensity from phenomenality, and
germinating a philosophy of scalar or stratal difference. In three
crucial anti-Kantian gestures he argues that ‘the will always
appears as the primary and fundamental thing, and throughout
asserts its preeminence over the intellect’ [Sch III 231], that
‘[phenomenon means representation and nothing more’ [Sch I
154] whilst ‘we are quite wrong in calling pain and pleasure
representations’ [Sch I 144], and continually refers to ‘the
ascending series of animal organizations’, ‘the scale of animals’
[Sch III 327], and more generally to ‘grades of the will’s
objectivity’ [Sch I 179], or degrees o { 1 stimulation or excitement 1 [III
240]. In Schopenhauer’s philosophy such thinking remains uncom-
fortably wedded to a series of bilateral disjunctions between the
transcendental and the empirical, subject and object, thing in itself
and appearance, etc., and is thus martialled under the meta-
physical dignity of man, whose nervous-system he describes as
‘nature’s final product’ [Sch III 320]. It nevertheless marks the
departure of a voyage in intensity, one that Nietzsche exacerbates
beyond the threshold of the irreparable.

*

In his appendix to The Metaphysics of Sexual Love Schopenhauer cites
the claim in Aristotle’s Politics that: ‘For children of people too old




Aborting the human race 141


as well as too young leave much to be desired in both a physical
and mental regard, and children of those in advanced years are
weaklings.’ A little later he comments:

Aristotle, therefore, lays down that a man who is fifty-four years
of age should not have any more children, though he may still
continue cohabitation for the sake of his health or for any other
reason. He does not say how this is to be carried into effect, but
he is obviously of the opinion that children conceived when their
parents are of such an age should be disposed of by abortion, for
he had recommended this a few lines previously [Sch IV 660].

The context for this peculiar remark is a discussion of pederasty,
or the libidinal architectonics of classical idealism. The philo-
sophical or academic relation is homoerotic and inter-generational;
a restricted pedagogy that mimics the unit of patrilineal reproduc-
tion. Schopenhauer’s endeavour is to map out a descriptive
eugenics that is able to provide biological intelligibility for such a
relation, and the consequence - indicated by his Aristotle citation —
is his suggestion that pederasty diverts young and old males from
procreative sexuality, in order to forestall the racial deterioration
that would result from the transmission of their inadequately
formed or decrepit sperm. It is thus that a subterranean complicity
is exposed between the Idea (or perfect form), patriarchy, and
racial hygiene.

Pederasty substitutes for abortion, translating it into the
homoerotic bond, and reproducing it in conformity with the
dominion of achieved form. The radical abortion of tragedy and
irredeemable waste is Socratically sublimated into the service of
the Idea, becoming a police function of theistic sociality, within a
political economy of managed sperm. There is a superficial pre-
conscious stratum of Nietzsche’s writing that harmonizes closely
with such a politics, for instance the note numbered 734 in The Will
to Power which argues:

Society, as the great trustee of life, is responsible to life itself for
every aborted life - it also has to pay for such lives: consequently
it ought to prevent them. In numerous cases, society ought to
prevent procreation: to this end, it may hold in readiness,
without regard to descent, rank, or spirit, the most rigorous
means of constraint, deprivation of freedom, in certain cir-
cumstances castration [N III 923],




142 The thirst for annihilation


There is little to perturb the Aristotelian legacy in such a remark,
except for a strange interference between abortions and forestal-
lings (the German series verfehlen, verhindem, vorbeugen). In Nietzsche’s
text abortion - in the loose sense Schopenhauer has opened - is
both the possible outcome of procreative anarchy and that which
characterizes a eugenic regime. Both of these senses are in play in
his famous remark from Ecce Homo : ‘no abortion was missing, not
even the antisemite’ [Nil 11 19]. Procreation is aborted in order to
avoid the procreation of abortions. If social institutions are to avoid
being aborted abortion must be socially institutionalized. If
Nietzsche’s argument is somewhat tangled at this point it is
because something essential to the classical model of reason has
miscarried.

Unlike the will to life, the will to power is not driven by the
tendency to realize and sustain a potential, its sole impetus is that
of overcoming itself. It has no motivating end, but only a
propulsive source. It is in this sense that will to power is creative
desire, without a pre-figured destination or anticipatory perfection.
It is an arrow shot into the unconceived. Will to power names the
pre-representational impetus for which life is a tool, and for which
tendency is inextricable from intensity. At the heart of the
terminological motor driving Nietzsche’s writings lie a series of
nouns of action, each of which subverts a dogma by designating a
genealogical topic. Nietzsche transcribes moralization fully as ‘the
genealogy of morals’, but the genealogy of logic is initiated under
the compact rubric of equalization (or logicization), as is the case
with eternalization, simplification, divinization, legislation, etc. It
is in this way that will to power is transcribed into thought by the
first stammerings of a positive ateleological syntax.

Schopenhauer is a philosopher of primal non-differentiation
because he conceives representation as individuating, according to
the spatial and temporal isolation imposed by the principle of
sufficient reason. Nietzsche recasts this principle into a general
tendency to assimilation which he names ‘equalization’ (Ausglei-
chung ), and it is this that makes him the first post-Kantian
philosopher of difference. In his notes he succinctly asserts: ‘the
will to equality is the will to power’ [N III 500]. Despite superficial
appearance, however, the difference between Schopenhauer and
Nietzsche is not simply that between thoughts of indifference and
difference. It is more a question of phases in the emergent thinking
of unilateral or non-reciprocal difference, which departs from the




Aborting the human race 143


bilateral difference synonymous with ontology. Between the
organic and the inorganic, for instance, there is not a bilateral or
reciprocal exclusion, but rather a unilateral separation of the
organic within the inorganic, such that the difference between the
two is wholly immanent to the inorganic as primary term. This is
the profound sense of economy: the energetic consistency between
zero-intensity and its deviations, or between a noun of action and
the antonym of its simple noun (e.g. between matter and
spiritualization). It is because such consistency cannot be thought
within the bilateral or non-contradiction logics traditionally
countenanced that Schopenhauer was inhibited from its radical
excavation.

The recurrence of the same cannot be diffentiated from the
unilaterality of difference, which is to say that recurrence is the
consistency of difference with equalization. It is not that energy is
what recurs as' the same, but rather that energy is the economic
sense of recurrence as unilateral consistency. Recurrence is not a
configuration of energy or cosmic economy, but the very impact of
undifferentiable zero; the abortion of transcendence. To think of
the real simultaneity of unsurpassable chaotic zero with the
triumph of reactivity, such that the only repressed is the
unrepressible, is to think of recurrence, and any suggestion that
eternal recurrence is a cosmology describable according to a
principle of non-contradiction is to entirely lose the matter of
Nietzsche’s excitement, i.e. the unilateral, materialist, or genealogi-
cal interpretation of difference. The sole philosophical rigour of
recurrence splashes out of the pulverizing inundation of bilateral
distinctions by indifferent matter. Spirit is different from matter
and matter once again, culture is different from nature and nature
once again, order is different from chaos and chaos once again, just
as life is unilaterally different from death, plenitude from zero,
reactive from active forces, etc. Transcendence is both real and
impossible, as is the human race.

‘Once again’ is a term which Nietzsche’s text binds inextricably
to the rumour of eternal recurrence, for instance in note 341 from
The Gay Science - often taken to be the first ‘announcement’ of the
doctrine of return — where Nietzsche twice uses the same
formulation to describe recurrence, ‘once again, and again in-
numerable times [noch einmal und noch unzahlige Male]’ [Nil 202],
There are very many places where this term plays a decisive role in
his writings, amongst which are those marking the repressed




144 The thirst for annihilation


unilaterality at the base of metaphysical binarities; for example in
his notebooks he remarks:

The ‘A’ of logic is, like the atom, a reconstruction of the thing —
If we do not grasp this, but make of logic a criterion of true
being, we are on the way to positing as realities all those
hypostases: substance, attribute, object, subject, action, etc.; that
is, to conceiving a metaphysical world, that is, a ‘real world’ (—
this, however, is the apparent world once again -) [N III 538],

The ‘real world’, however one has hitherto conceived it - it has
always been the apparent world once again [N III 689],

Whether of Judaic or Platonic inspiration, monotheism rests upon
hypostatizing the differential element of the human animal. It is
because spirit, personality, reason, and law have all been taken as
defining characteristics of man, that one finds the cosmos crushed
under an absolute spirit, an infinite personality, pure reason, and
perfect justice. When confronted by the gothic intimidation
synonymous with Western culture it is hard to re-excavate the fact
that one is merely dealing with a beast advantaged by a measure of
superior cunning, a hypertrophic facility for the transfer of
information, and an opposable thumb.

The meaning of humanity is abuse of the vanquished; the
transformation of intensive difference into metaphysical disjunc-
tion. The libidinal sense of Platonism, for instance, is the
paralysation of an intensive ascent in accordance with an
exhaustive concept. Intensive spiritualization is fixed as consum-
mate spirit, thus levelling out desire onto the stagnant plateau of
theological idealism dominated by Christendom. Upon this plateau
progress in extension remains possible — scientific, technical, and
industrial growth for instance - but such development is rigidly
constrained by its infrastructural libidinal petrification; imprisoned
in the humanity whose first instance was Socrates, and whose
horizonal limit is Christ.

The broad strokes of Nietzsche’s diagnosis are well known:

I count life itself as an instinct for growth, for duration, for
amassing of force, for power : where the will to power is lacking
there is decline. My assertion is that this will is lacking for all the
highest values of humanity - that decline-values, nihilistic values,
pursue dominion under the most hallowed names [N II 1 167-8],




Aborting the human race 145


It is the devaluation of the highest values, the convulsion at the
zenith of nihilism, that aborts the human race. Having polarized
the high and the low in extension, humanity finds itself destituted
of its idols - which have purifieid themselves into overt inexistence
- and is thereby plunged vertiginously into its abjected values;
animality, pathology, sensuality, and materiality. At the end of
human civilization there is thus a regression driven by zero, a
violent spasm of relapse whose motor is the cavity of an extinct
telos; the death of God. Zero religion.

As a creature of zero, overman is not a conceptually intelligible
advance upon humanity. Any such thing is, in any case, strictly
impossible. Humanity cannot be exacerbated, but only aborted. It
is first necessary to excavate the embryonic anthropoid beast at the
root of man, in order to re-open the intensive series in which it is
embedded. If overman is an ascent beyond humanity, it is only in
the sense of being a redirection of its intensive foetus. This is why
overman is predominantly regressive; a step back from extension in
order to leap in intensity, like the drawing-back of a bow-string.

The zero is the transmission element which integrates active and
reactive impulses at the end of the great Platonic divorce between
nature and culture. Zero is undifferentiable without being a unity,
and everything is re-engaged through zero. Eternal recurrence -
the most nihilistic thought - begins everything again, as history is
re-energized through the nihilistic indifferentiation between zero
enthusiasm and enthusiasm for zero. Passive nihilism is the zero
of religion, whilst active nihilism is the religion of the zero. On
the one hand is Schopenhauer’s metaphysical pessimism as ‘a
European Buddhism’ [N II 767], on the other Nietzsche’s
Dionysian pessimism as the exultation of dissolution. Within the
order of bilateralized representation the ‘will to nothingness’ [N II
837, 863] is of profound ambivalence:

‘either abolish your reverence or -your self.’ The latter would be

nihilism; but would not the former also be - nihilism? - This is

our question mark [N II 212].

Nihilism as concrete history is Christianity, and it is only because
Christianity is as impossible as it is real that nature escapes from
being stigmatized to its foundations by the cult of the Nazarene.
Christianity as inconsistency with matter recurs consistently with
matter and thus inconsistently with itself. This is the motor of




146 The thirst for annihilation


nihilism; the great zero, and the impersonal generator of nature
and culture in their incompossible consistency.

Christianity, as Nietzsche insists over and over again in The
Antichrist, is Judaism once again [noch einmal], ‘Once again came the
popular expectation of a Messiah into the foreground’ [N II 1202],
he writes in section 40 of The Antichrist, and two pages later, getting
a little carried away: ‘once again the priest-instinct of the Jews
perpetrated the same great crime against history’ [N II 1204],
Against the tide of Teutonic antisemitism, with its project of
Hellenizing, Aryanizing, and Wagnerizing Christ, Nietzsche is
obsessive in his claim that Christianity is nothing except a
recurrence of Jewish monotheism; which is not a mere repetition,
but a return that both exacerbates and corrodes. ‘The Christian,
this ultima ratio of the lie, is the Jew once again - three times even’
[N II 1206]. Europe is a population whose history has fallen prey
to the zealots of the One; victim to the spreading ripple from the
same catastrophe of monotheism which culturally vivisected the
ancient Hebrew warrior tribes into the broken rabble of apostles
and first Christians, huddling in wretched destitution beneath the
shadow of the cross.

‘Once again’ - recurrence — does not say that an identity is
repeated, except when thought is devastated by the reciprocity of
reason and the mono-logic of the same. Monotheism is not
repeated, but nihilistically exacerbated by unilateral zero, and
driven irresistibly into the death of God where it consummates its
truth. There is a savage rigour to Nietzsche’s thinking here:

[T]he little rebellious movement, baptized in the name of Jesus
of Nazareth, is the Jewish instinct once again, in other words, the
priest-instinct, which no longer tolerates the priest as a reality,
the invention of a yet more destitute form of existence, a yet
more unreal vision of the world, than that which conditions the
organization of a church. Christianity denies the church ...[Nil
1189],

When Nietzsche’s loathing for Christianity reaches its crescendo it
becomes an obsessive reiteration of the One. One, one, one, over
and over again, monotono-theism [N II 1179] as Nietzsche calls it;
a God whose speculative triad collapses everything into the one,
the Father, Son, and Spirit, power, benevolence, and knowledge,
the simplicity, equality, and ontological individuality of the soul,
the entire universe crumpled up together by a phallic fanaticism for




Aborting the human race 147


monolithic form. Christian trinitarianism is the demonstration that
everything comes back to One unless it is zero. To set up the
question of difference as a conflict between the one and the many is
a massive strategic blunder - the Occident lost its way at this point
— the real issue is not one or many, but many and zero. Nietzsche
writes:

Wherever there are walls I shall inscribe this eternal accusation
against Christianity upon them — I can write in letters which
make even the blind see ... I call Christianity the one great
curse, the one great instinct depravity, the one great instinct for
revenge for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret,
subterranean, petty - I call it the one immortal blemish of
mankind ... [N II 1235].

*

This blemish is not a scar, but a callus, because the association
between God and man is a matter of industrial relations. Unitary
being is the order of work. God who creates and conserves, man
who toils; theology stinks of sweat. Long before Marx, it was
monotheism that hallucinated the earth into a work-house.

As soon as we imagine someone who is responsible for our being
thus and thus, etc. (God, nature), and therefore attribute to him
the intention that we should exist and be happy or wretched, we
corrupt for ourselves the innocence of becoming. We then have
someone who wants to achieve something through us and with
us [N III 542],

History is industrial history, and it only has one goal, which is
God. Nihilism is the loss of this goal, the nullification of man’s end,
the reversion of all work to waste. It is in this sense that history is
aborted by zero. There are those who in their eagerness for the
continuation of effort take Nietzsche’s overman to be a new goal, a
restoration of teleology, a task commensurable with the nihilation
of history. Perhaps Nietzsche himself succumbs to such a
temptation at times, after all, German Protestantism had poisoned
his blood. It must nevertheless be insisted that the world of work
perishes with the One, and that zero is an engine of war.

When truth steps into the fight against the lies of millennia we
shall have seisms, spasms of earthquake, a displacement of
mountain and valley, the like of which has never been dreamed.




148 The thirst for annihilation


The concept of politics then passes over totally into a war of the
spirit, all power edifices of the old society are blasted into the air
- they all rest upon the lie: there shall be wars as there have
never been upon the earth. From myself onwards, for the first
time, is there great politics on the earth [N II 1153].

Between war and industry is a unilateral difference; industry is
different from war and war once again. This is why great politics is
not just an episode of war, but the very tide of recurrence in its
ferocity. Nothing is great but zero, and great politics is that for
which the polis itself falls victim. Nietzsche is thus utterly
incapable of consenting to the Aristotelian dictum, in his Politics ,
that ‘the art of war is a natural subdivision of the art of acquisition’
[Pol 16], associated with his assertion that ‘[t]ame animals have a
better nature than wild ones’ [Pol 11], In its uninhibited and
extravagant root war does not serve the state. Even in his earliest
writings Nietzsche is explicit that the order of dependence is quite
to the contrary, and that the polis - along with its telic integration
- is a consequence of pre-political militarism. In a text from the
early 1870s called The Greek State Nietzsche notes that:

Whoever contemplates war and its uniformed possibility, the
military [ Soldatenstand ], in relation to the previously outlined
essence of the state, must come to the insight that through war
and the military an image, or perhaps rather a blueprint of the
state is set before our eyes. Here we see, as the most general
effect of the tendency to war, an immediate separation and
division of chaotic masses into military castes, upon which the
edifice of the ‘warrior society’ raises itself, pyramidally, upon the
lowest, broadest, slavish stratum. The unconscious purpose of
the entire movement compels each individual under its yoke and
generates even with heterogeneous natures a similar chemical
transformation of their properties, until they are brought into
purposive affinity [N III 284],

Much later, and more importantly, Zarathustra tells us:

You should love peace as a means to new wars. And the short
peace more than the long one. /I do not advise you to work,
rather to struggle [N II 312].

These are the most profound words in the history of military
thought; the libidinal comprehension of peace as a unilateral




Aborting the human race 149


differentiation from war. On its extensive or political plane war
appears as the antagonistic juxtaposition of constellated forces, but
on its intensive or cosmic axis it is a metamorphosis of forces; their
relative decomposition from strategic ensembles and purposes,
towards tactical fragments and initiatives; dissolvant excitations at
the edge of zero, the goalless polemos of Herakleitean flux. In
extension war can appear to be oriented to appropriation,
domination, and subordination, but intensively it develops accord-
ing to tendencies of subtilization, infiltration, and dissolution. It is
not that there is merely a desire for war, variously named by
Nietzsche the ‘thirst for destruction’ [N III 821], ‘the drive to
destroy, anarchism, nihilism’ [N III 708], and ‘will to nothingness’
[Nil 900, III 738], rather that war in its intensive sense is desire
itself, convulsive recurrence, unilateral zero.

*

The three great economic discourses of modernity can be
summarized under the names Marx, Freud, Clausewitz. In each
case what is sought is a rigorous comprehension of surplus, and in
each case this is thought of primarily as success; industrial profit,
psycho-sexual satisfaction, or military advantage. Sex and war can
seem industrial, work and war libidinal, or business and love like
war. Is Lenin’s reading of the First World War more convincing
than Freud’s (think of Jiinger), or than Foucault’s reading of
industrial history? Such questions are complex, and easily effaced
in an eagerness for reduction. Furthermore, Marx already sees that
political economy has its irreducibly military features (‘the so-
called primitive accumulation’), just as Freud sees that the psyche
is a battle-field. Wars are produced and desired, industrial conflicts
waged, commodities eroticized. The human animal seems to work,
fuck, and fight, without accomplishing definition in terms of secure
boundaries.

Bataille does not hesitate on this question: he locates war and
industry within a general economy as the respective tendencies to
useless and to productive expenditure. War is the free movement of
solar flow across the earth, whilst industry is its inhibition, such
that war is imbued with sacred characteristics; irrationality,
horror, and the incendiary glory of ‘donation of self [ le don de soi]
[VII 237, 242, etc.]. This immediately contests the Leninist
reduction of war to productivist motivations, siding instead with a
(late-) Freudian account of base thanatropic drives. War is not the




1 50 The thirst for annihilation


parasite of production, less still its instrument. War is rather the
prisoner of production; its repressed energy source, overflow, and
implicit catastrophe. Far from being the Frankenstein monster of
production, war has a solar genealogy.

War is not meant here in a Clausewitzean sense, which is to say,
as an instrument of policy. War in its radical sense is not an
instrument of any kind, least of all a political one. The relation of
war to the political is not (in reality) one of technical subordina-
tion, but rather, one of the uncircumscibed to the field of its
potential circumscription. Only when it has been domesticated,
and inhibited in its tropism to utter dissolution, can the sad dog we
know as ‘war’ be subjected to policy; as the negative potency of the
state. War escapes a Clausewitzean definition therefore, although
this is not to dispute the very great pertinence of Clausewitz’s
thought to its servile forms. Krieg is no doubt indelibly scarred by
its Prussian serfdom, but this need not efface its wilder features; the
cosmological nobility described by Herakleitus, and the lines of
hydraulic intricacy traced by Sun Tzu. There is even an
inescapable sense in which war is beautiful - especially when
compared to the sordid idiocy of work - since even its abject forms
spill over into something harsh, fluid, and untamed. War is a
luxuriance of chances, which is quite consistent with its shattering
ugliness as a loathesome vampire trailing hideous carnage, the
swamp breeding ground of vermin and plague. Whatever its
terrible allure, there is nothing more profoundly degrading than
war. It alone is truly base.

The word ‘war’ derives all the crucial currents of its sense from
that of being the drive to dissolution, much as Freud described it in
the wake of the First World War. It is the oceanic wilderness which
is always other to civilization, irrespective of the compromise
formations that seem to unify them. War irrupts convulsively into
the history of civilizations as a loss of control, partially managed,
with varying degrees of adeptness, by competing political interests.
Such interruption is undergone as a de-humanizing regression; the
re-surfacing of an ineliminable allergy to integrity, for which ‘man’ is
a circumscription. It is an incidental feature of Freud’s account that
one sees even the armed contest of the European states as a massively
inhibited lurch towards the free-flow fundamental violence of desire.
Civilization (with its attendant militarism) is war subject to
repression, and the energy of war is Thanatos; base hydraulics.




Aborting the human race 151


The chronological tendency of Bataille’s writings is one of
demilitarization, with the ardour for insurrectionary war that
typifies his early polemics being rapidly phased out of his text from
the early 1940s onwards (although not with the decisiveness he
himself suggests [VII 461]). The sacrificial exigency becomes
increasingly interpreted as one of forestalling war [VII 31-3],
slipping precariously towards the abject status of a means to the
preservation of peace. Whatever interest such political contortions
might have from the perspective of reconstructive biography and
retrospective moral pontification, their consequences for the
development of general economics is of vanishing insignificance.
Whether we approve or disapprove of war is, after all, scarcely the
issue. (Anything of which we can approve is, in any case, less than
war, disputation over this question is superfluous; war is hideous
evil, and to affirm it is to cease to be human.)

War is not an evil, but evil itself. Every reckless debauching of
humanity’s productive resources has a military character; com-
pacted from anarchic violence, senseless prodigality, contestation,
regression, contagion, and heterogeneity. This is why criminality
has an archaic sense as aggression against the community (whose
relics survive in banditry and the military infrastructure of penal
forms), and why the unconscious is metaphorized spontaneously as
an insurgency. Sade’s orgies share this military principle; ‘governed’
dissolvantly by force, treachery, sacrificial glory, and filth. It is the
collapse of the centralized pacification of the populace which is at
once the historical and literary space of the Sadean text; the
uneven disintegration of society into armed packs, bands of
robbers, and outlaws, as heterogeneous forces criss-cross the
disinterred battle-fields of the decomposing regime, trailing vice,
disorder, and ruin in their wake.

*

War is unreason, but what is reason? It is something like a pearl; the
symptom of a protracted irritation. When a people becomes philo-
sophical there is always an institution of torture to be found. In the
Occidental world the basic implement of this torture, the very
chamber or territorium of cruelty, has been called the soul. Like a black,
damp, and freezing cell it has always been a torment in itself. Europe
has been chained in the soul, dangling with bleeding wrists, until it
lusted for destruction with a foul and parched thirst. ‘Inspired’ by
the symbol of its gibbeted God, it has been a perpetual crusade.




1 52 The thirst for annihilation


With the immense, almost inexplicable energy that stems from
controlled fury, the philosophers have tended the carniverous
worm gnawing at our brains. Perhaps they thought that if they
could sate it with an ethics its devouring would diminish for a
while, but such judgement attests to a severe deterioration of the
military instinct. The attempt to bargain is already a devastating
defeat. To acknowledge weakness, to await response, to fend . . .
these are all incompetent positions to adopt. At the level of tactics
it might sometimes be necessary to fall back into a defensive
posture, but grand-strategy begins and ends with a commitment to
initiative; to the offensive. Pragmatism is finally indissociable from
aggression. Due to a strategic idiocy on the part of its philosophers,
Europe has tried to make peace with its soul, yet remorselessly -
stimulated - the mutilation continues, and with each bite we suffer
and intuit self.

The dissipation of the soul would not relate to thought as an
object of theoretical representation. There would be something
almost touching about Hegel’s clutching for philosophical Aujldsung
if it were not so pitifully stupid. It takes only the most rudimentary
psychology to know that for as long as ‘I think’ theory will be
merely a brutal jest; a way of baiting the nervous system into an
apoplexy. Whatever is thought in the grim mode of responsibility
can only be registered as a grating aggravation, because it is
precisely the ego which is unable to dissolve itself in thinking;
clattering with its chains through labyrinths of confession,
transforming energy flux into representation, into frustration.
When we speak it rattles like a jagged stone in our throats. A little
over two millennia ago we began to cough up strange new words
with our blood and bile, and in certain quarters the excruciation of
libido began to be called ‘philosophy’.

These Germans have employed fearful means to make them-
selves a memory, in order to become masters of their basic
instincts and their brutal crudity: one thinks about the old
German punishments, stoning for instance (the sagas already
allow for a mill-stone to be dropped upon the head of the guilty),
breaking on the wheel (the most authentic invention and
speciality of German genius in the realm of punishment!),
piercing with stakes, tearing or trampling with horses (‘quarter-
ing’), boiling the criminal in oil or wine (still in the fourteenth
and fifteenth century), the well-loved flaying (‘cutting with




Aborting the human race 1 53


thongs’), cutting flesh out of the breast; one also covered the evil-
doer with honey and left him to the flies in the burning sun.
With the help of such images and procedures one finally kept
five or six ‘I will nots’ in the memory, in relation to which one
has given one’s word, in order to live under the advantages of
society - and really! - with the help of this type of memory one
came finally to ‘reason’! — Ah, reason, seriousness, mastery over
the affects, this entire gloomy business called reflection, all these
privileges and adornments of men: how dearly they have been
made to pay for them! how much blood and horror is at the base
of all ‘good things’! [N II 803-4],

Philosophers are vivisectors, surgeons who have evaded the
Hippocratic moderation. They have the precise and reptilian
intelligence shared by all those who experiment with living things.
Perhaps there is nothing quite as deeply frozen as the sentiment of
a true philosopher, for it is necessary to be quite dispassionate if
one is to find things theoretically intriguing. Strong thought is always
experimentation in the severe style; ‘cut, then watch’. It is not easy
to be the friend - or the body - of a philosopher. They have always
understood that if one is not amused by suffering, there is little point
in attempting to reason.

It is the great pain, that long slow pain which takes its time, and
in which we are burnt as by green wood, that first drives us, we
philosophers, to climb into our final depth, and to do away with
all trust, everything good-natured, veiling, mild, average, in
which, perhaps, we previously located our humanity. I doubt
whether such pain ‘improves’ — ; but I know that it makes us
deeper [N II 13].

‘Remorselessness’ is a word that is quite quickly and easily said.
To perform it against oneself and others is harder. It could scarcely
be said to be a virtue, it has no hopes, and it hurts. One would be
surprised, perhaps, to encounter it often. Yet the bleak compulsion
for the desert — for sterile austerity - is somehow perpetually
regenerated, as if there were a diffuse and inarticulate longing for
the futility of obssession.

Given a sufficiently terrible history, in which useless sacrifice has
become automatic — uninteresting - such nihilism is easy to
explain. If one wants to be available for thought a stringent and icy
code is requisite. One must first learn to develop a predatory sense




1 54 The thirst for annihilation


for anything comforting that could be excised from one’s life. For
instance, all the little luxuries that, once savoured, have become
habitual; every residue of leisure and indulgence buried in routines;
and every relic of ancient mollifications (even when these are
disguised as disciplines, as chastisements, as despair). Since the
human being is a social animal it is inevitable that — pushed
beyond a certain threshold - its solitude will become a destitution
for it. If one is to generate ‘thinkers’ this must be exacerbated to
the extreme. One must seek to eradicate the capacity for love, or
rather, since this is unrealistic, one must infuse it with a harsh
and paralysing cynicism. It is of particular importance that all
traces of tenderness — that most dangerously blissful affect - be
ground rigorously into the dirt. Life must be stripped down to its
bare frame, and there is always something to be eliminated that
one had mistakenly thought was architectural, but which was in
fact quite different: merely a reinforcement. For it is only in being
allowed to fall that a structure discovers its emaciated erectness - its
spine.

Philosophy is a discipline. It takes only the most casual reading
of Nietzsche’s Genealogie to begin to take this word seriously; to
detect its mixed aroma of sweetness and putridity that betrays
innumerable spillages of blood. In addition, for those trained by
Nietzsche into a more acute genealogical sensitivity - splicing
refinement with a tense sickness of the nerves — a fuller panoply of
odours becomes detectable; the sharp sting of fermented pain, the
mustiness of prolonged despair, and the rich rankness — luxuriant
in its metaphysical resonances - that only ripens in the miasma of
frequent and premature death. There are few, if any, who could
gaze unflinchingly into the laboratory of human cultures, but
then, this is scarcely an option: the true training process of the
intellect is not on display. Those fragments of atrocity that
accidentally remain exposed, whether due to the vaunting of a
defeated enemy’s bestiality, intestine conflicts within a power
apparatus, the disruptive effects of natural catastophe, or some
other reason of this kind, must function as symptoms of a generally
buried horror.

If disciplinary violence is to be effective it is crucial that it be
without justification, and thus indifferent to teleology, either
positive or negative. It must not seem as if anything is wanted. For
the most direct way of softening a tool is to begin to give it
reasons; eventually it begins to think it has a right to reasons.




Aborting the human race 155


Suffering must be obviously futile if it is to be ‘educational’. It is
for this reason that our history is so unintelligible, and indeed,
nothing that was true has ever made sense. ‘Why was so much
pain necessary ?’ we foolishly ask. But it is precisely because history
has made no sense that we have learnt from it, and the lesson
remains a brutal one.

Useless suffering has always been Europe’s ‘practical philo-
sophy’, our true evangelium, communicated to every cranny of the
earth with unparalleled dedication. After all, it is the secret of so
many things. So much power becomes accessible at the point
where one loses all capability to enjoy it, and better the misery of
the master than the wretchedness of the slave. Thus it is that
entering the space of reason has always required that one spit upon
the fierce pleasures of the savages, resigning oneself instead to an
infinite vacuity.

*

Academic prose has the remarkable capacity to plunge one into a
sublime dystopian nightmare: is anything this appalling really possible?
one asks. What happened to these people? Is it part of some
elaborate joke perhaps? Or do they just hate books? There is a
sense in which one can only admire their ability to make
Nietzsche seem like a bank manager, Bataille like an occupational
therapist, or Derrida world-historic, but in the end one vomits.
Such writing is unparalleled as an introduction to despair: a
universe in which it is possible condemns itself. (With trembling
fingers one turns the pages: we have really come to this.) One only has
to read genuine scholarship to be wracked by ardent dreams of
incinerated cities.

Bataille’s Sur Nietzsche stands alone in the salt flats of Nietzsche
‘reception’ (there is no generic term that fails to insult in this
context). One of Cioran’s casual jokes is of inestimably greater
value in making contact with Nietzsche than the whole of
Heidegger’s ponderously irrelevant Nietzsche. The exceptions are
rare enough: Klossowski’s Nietzsche et le cercle vicieux was better
written than not, even though it stinks of transcendental
philosophy, and Deleuze’s Nietzsche et la philosophie is saved by being
solely about Deleuze (an academic who can think!). Otherwise
there is only an almost mystical vacuity, the gibberings of a
lobotomy ward.

Upon encountering Sur Nietzsche one flips through the pages with




156 The thirst for annihilation


mounting excitement: no sign of scholarship or servility, prose that
burns like an ember in the void, precision, profundity, esprit. The
shock is almost lethal. The euphoria blazes painfully for weeks. At
last! A book whose aberration is on the scale of Nietzsche’s own; a
sick and lonely book. The fact that such a book could be published
even dampens one’s enthusiasm for the universal eradication of the
species.

How were the slapstick Nietzscheans going to punish Bataille for
writing a beautiful and profound book about their master? The
answer is simple; one merely extrapolates from their lack of
imagination. ‘Let us do the same thing again,’ they squeal happily,
‘let us bury him. Let us be ever so professional in our dealings with
this dangerous animal, and nurture another limping dwarf.’

*

Superficially, Bataille’s engagement with Nietzsche is difficult to
locate. He has no sympathy for the announcement of the overman,
his exoteric reading of eternal recurrence is hasty and crude, and
that of will to power dismissive. He takes the thought of overman
to be a residual spectre of idealist productivism, and in his early
essay ‘The Old Mole: on the prefix sur- in surhomme and
surrealism’ (but not overkill) he aligns it with the aspirational
element in surrealism, a position he never revised. Eternal
recurrence he considers to be an immotivating tactic, exhausted by
its negative function. In Sur Nietzsche he associates it with an
‘acceptation that is not preceded by any effort ’ [VI 159]. As for will
to power; what need for an impulse to the accumulation of force on
a planet drowned in solar luxuriance? It is not any positive
doctrine, therefore, that lures Bataille into the labyrinth of
Nietzsche’s writing. He is drawn down into these texts by their
‘own’ labyrinthine character, and by the nihilist religion that
haunts them, which he approaches through the death of God, and
entitles ‘the will to chance’.

The will to chance is not an addition to the archive of
philosophical concepts. It is first of all the subsidence of Sur
Nietzsche from discursive responsibility into a patchwork of
quotations, theoretical passages, poems, aphorisms, fragments, and
diary extracts, much written in the first person. In this way it
protracts the disintegrative virulence of Nietzsche’s writings with
an exuberance quite alien to the pedants of the academy. In
Bataille’s communion with Nietzsche something occurs that is




Aborting the human race 157


utterly incommensurable with commentary, exegesis, or interpreta-
tion. ‘If community does not exist,’ he writes, ‘M. Nietzsche is a
philosopher’ [VI 27]. Sur Nietzsche - like Nietzsche’s ‘own’ texts - is
a space of community rather than a contribution to a body of
scholarly work. ‘My life, in company with Nietzsche, is a
community, my book is that community’ [VI 33], Not a study,
therefore, but a pact against industry, a re-activation of a war, and
if Nietzsche is to be labelled a philosopher it is only in the violently
pardoxical guise of ‘the philosopher of evil’ [VI 16].

Against the abortive consolidation of Kantian industrialism
associated with Hegel and teleology, Bataille counterposes Nietzsche
and the naked risk of chaos, war, eroticism, and surrender to the
sacred. ‘There is nothing I want except chance’ [VI 161], certainly
not salvation therefore, or anything associated with God who ‘by
definition, is not in play’ [VI 84], The will to chance no longer
resents the irresponsibility of immanence, and Nietzsche figures as
the attestation that ‘[u]nlike God, man is not condemned to
condemn’ [VI 75], Devotion, prayer, hope, or faith are all violently
corroded by the will to chance, which relapses towards immanence,
and ‘immanence is impiety itself’ [VI 81], Bataille protects nothing
(one cannot offend against the sacred): ‘I love irreligion, the
disrespect of putting in play’ [VI 86], Nevertheless, there is no
religion that is not a chance, and no morality that is not chance’s
denial. Morality is the domain of tasks, whilst religion dissolves
itself in fate.

The will to chance is the sacrifice of the will. This is not to say
that the will enacts its own end, since any act of surrender merely
consolidates humanity; extending the range of its possibilities into
negation. Unlike any act, the will to chance resists the order of the
possible, but even its resistance is involuntary, a ‘[fjatality of
working evil, in disorder’ [VI 154], Between chance and the will is
impossibility or unilateral difference, such that the succumbing of
the will is itself succumbed to as a chance. Chance is everything
that no agent can do, and its range is only circumscribed by
fictions (although dense ones). It is the same as time [VI 140, 149];
collapse of individuated being into communication. ‘Being, humans,
are not able to “communicate” — live — than outside of themselves.
And as they must “communicate”, they must will this evil, this
pollution, which, putting their own beings into play, renders them
penetrable one to the other’ [VI 48],

Chance is not a pre-ontological arche-reserve of possibilities, and




1 58 The thirst for annihilation


to think of it as such is merely to displace ontology; reducing
chance to randomness once again. A chance has no essence outside
its instantiation, which is merely an assertion of the elementary
anti-Platonism sufficient in principle (were it not in fact unintel-
ligible) for the generation of minimally materialist thought. Chance
is not some kind of infra-, super-, or ur-being, and there is no sense
at all in which it surreptitiously ‘is’. The ‘ground’ of the accident is
even more accidental than the accident itself.

Chance is far less a fundament than a betrayal, at once radical
and gratuitous, whereby being falls prey to its indeterminate
exactness. Being derives only a vanishing speck of its contingency
from the fact that it is haunted by the logical spectre of an
eliminative negativity. The overwhelmingly preponderant part of
its deviance stems from its irresolvable composition, beyond which
there is only idealist phantasmatics. If being is conceptualized,
through submission to logical functions (either that of opposition to
nullity, or distinction from arbitrary specification), it is idealisti-
cally reconstructed in a process that is one with the repression of
chance. What separates base materialism from the scholastic
differentiation between composition and creation (culminating in
the Heideggerian meditation upon being) is its realism, in
accepting that being is only what it is. In other words, being is
indeterminably or intensely unnecessary.

That being is a chance means that it is logically intolerant ; starving
almost the entire field of possibility of the resource for actualiza-
tion. The real context for being’s logic (ontology) is famine. It is in
this sense that Spinozism provides such a decisive paradigm for the
theoretical decompression of intensity, since it is programmed by
the meticulous refusal of being’s logical intolerance (a necessity for
one writing of deus sive natura). It is perhaps only here that Spinoza
succumbs abjectly to the tradition, blinding himself to the
vertiginous modal skewing which attests to the psychosis of God,
and impresses itself upon materialist thought as violence and
crime.

It is not that Nietzsche pronounces upon chance in a way that
Bataille comes to decode, but rather that in Nietzsche’s text chance
decouples itself from the prison of probability, exploding in its
luxuriant immensity. Nietzsche’s writing is not a doctrine, but a
convulsion of hazard, breaking open the cage of Kant’s nihil
negativum to float in a positive insanity, ‘dissolved and free’ [VI
155], As early as 1936, in his article ‘Sacrifices’, Bataille explores




Aborting the human race 159


such a cosmic antilogic, in which irresolvable improbability,
irrational negation, and interminable compositional intricacy are
interwoven. When compared with the play of combination
occurring at an inferior stratum of composition every ‘being’ is an
improbability so violent that Bataille labels it ‘chance’. If there
were a final stratum of eventuation chance would be subordinated
to statistical principles, but something quite other is the case. An
aberrant space which Bataille - borrowing one of Nietzsche’s
favourite ‘metaphors’ - refers to consistently as ‘the labyrinth’.




Chapter 10

The labyrinth


The spirals, or galaxies, which uncoil in their gigantic tentacles
of light in dark space, are composed of innumerable stars or
stellar systems gathered in an ‘ensemble movement’. The stars
are able to be simple or composed. They are able, if one accepts
that the solar system is not an exception in the immensity of the
heavens, to be accompanied by a whirlwind of planets and, in
the same way, the known planets are often doubled by satellites
. . . Celestial bodies, whatever they are, are composed of atoms,
but, at least if one considers those whose temperature is greatest,
the atoms of the radiating stars have no possibility of belonging
to any other particular composition at the interior of the star
itself: they are in the dominion of the stellar mass and of its central
movement. Quite the contrary with the atoms of the terrestrial
periphery - of the crust and the atmosphere - which are free of
this dominion: it is permissible for them to enter into
composition in powers which possess a developed independence
in relation to the dominion of the mass. The whole surface of the
planet is formed not only of molecules each uniting a small
number of atoms, but also compositions which are much more
complex, some crystalline and some colloidal, the latter arriving
at the autonomous powers of life, of the plant, of the animal, of
man, of human society [I 516-17],

The surface of the earth is formed out of molecules; each
molecule unites a certain number of atoms; molecules often unite
themselves, forming groups of a colloidal or crystalline nature. It
is such colloids which assemble themselves to compose the
individuality of the living being: plant, animal, human, escaping
in that fashion from the general movement of the world, they
each constitute a little world apart for themselves. Animals are





The labyrinth 1 61


able to assemble amongst themselves in turn. Humans ag-
glomerate themselves into little groups and the little groups into
larger groups, then into states. At the summit of these compositions
one finds oneself at the greatest distance from ‘nature’ [VII 188],

Benoit Mandelbrot walks along a rocky shoreline in the evening.
The edge of the land scales downwards through boulders, pebbles,
gravel, beyond sand and into elusive extremities of complexity. The
ocean is dark, suggestive of death.

If the movement of a thing is always a change within a greater
thing it becomes equivalent to a partial dying. A flotsam of
seaweed, small animals, fish-eggs, biological detritus, and mineral
particles infiltrates innumerable estuaries. It seems as if they are
exploring new intricacies of proximity. Mandelbrot wonders
whether how long is the coastline of Britain? asks the same as how close
can we get? How inter-tangled, how confused?

*

Bodies are not volumes but coastlines; irresolvable but un-
delimitable penetrabilities, opportunites for the real decomposition
of space. How many orifices has the human body? The osmotic
transfusion of saline chemicals from a drop of alien perspiration
impacts upon a cluster of epidermal cells as an annihilating
copulation.

*

As the third part of Bataille’s Inner Experience meanders towards its
insatiate termination in a splintered discussion of communication,
it opens a confused and fissured space entitled The Labyrinth (or the
Composition of Beings). Or rather, from a certain perspective, a
certain scale, this space seems fissured, as if integrity were merely
interrupted.

The labyrinth is not an intervention into being, but an
infestation or irresolvably complex collapse, replacing being with
an illimitable corrosion. The labyrinth is precisely the positive
impossibility of privileged scales ; both the recurrence of irreducible
detail across scales, and the recurrence of irreducible diversity in
the transitions between scales. Complex heterogeneity is not
suppressed by any refinement of focus, nor are simplicity,
autonomy, elementariness, ever approached; ‘being is nowhere’ [V
98],

The labyrinth is a complexity that cannot be determined as an




162 The thirst for annihilation


extrinsic predicate of substance; one that returns the pretension of
substantiality to the uncircumscribed recession of detailing which
undoes it. When woven into the labyrinth all substantiality
succumbs to an unconceptualizable implosion; becoming the mere
cypher for the unresolved precision of porosity. There is only
‘relative simplicity’ [V 98] and not being, or at least, being is
diffused irrecoverable by its ‘own’ ‘labyrinthine construction’ [V
99],

The labyrinth is constructed by a recurrence — a drifting
replication and a replication of drift - that proliferates an a-polar
fission: ‘two principles — transcendent composition of components,
relative autonomy of components - regulate the existence of each
“being”’ [V 101]. Whatever the level or degree there is never
achieved totality or simplicity, but always composition/component,
an insoluble compact of integration and complexity.

I can, if need be, admit that developing from an extreme
complexity, being imposes upon reflexion more than an elusive
appearance - but complexity, gradually increasing, is for this
more a labyrinth in which it wanders endlessly, then is lost once
and for all [V 98-9].

*

I do not have the least pretension to mathematical competence; my
inability to subscribe to the superstition of number has crippled my
intellect in this respect. Nevertheless, what little I understand
about the influx of chaos themes into mathematics suggests that
the discipline is being shifted in an encouragingly anti-Platonic
direction, provoking me to make a few confused remarks.

The very notion of a ‘mathematics of chaos’ seems to suggest a
grotesque domestication, such as the enfeeblement of chaos into a
statistically intelligible randomness. For this reason my immediate
reaction to the mathematics of chaos was one of visceral suspicion,
even though a thread of eighteenth and nineteenth century German
philosophy had prepared me for its topic. Nevertheless, it is not
easy to imagine a mathematician ceasing to be a Platonist. Nor
easy to remain immune to the virological seduction of ‘a geometry
of the pitted, pocked, and broken-up, the twisted, tangled, and
intertwined’ as Gleick summarizes it in his popularizing book [Ch
94], or to sustain an indifference to topological explorations
characterized by mathematical orthodoxy as ‘monstrous, dis-
respectful to all reasonable intuition about shapes and . . .
pathologically unlike anything to be found in nature’ [Ch 100],




The labyrinth 163


A glance at the purportedly chaomorphic ‘Sierpensky-’ or
‘Menger sponge’ both confirms and undermines such suspicions; it
is a shape that is homogenized, saturated with equalities, inanely
geometric, yet also irresolvable, paradoxical, unhealthy. A Menger
sponge results from the endless recursion of a simple operation. A
cube is divided into twenty-seven identical smaller cubes, with the
central block and each of the six orthogonally adjacent ones being
removed. The resulting frame consists of twenty blocks, which are
then all treated in the same way as the initial cube, and so on,
recursively. Each transformation increases surface area with a
tendency to infinity, and decreases volume with a tendency to zero.
However far this process is taken the sponge remains cohesive, and
it is possible to trace a line in three dimensions from any point on
the surface to any other. In its ideal conception a Menger sponge is
thus a model of infinitely complex immanence; a universe of
endlessly intricate distances, without inaccessible depths or
absolute ruptures. Exceeding a surface, but evading volume, the
Menger sponge is a shape of between two and three dimensions,
or of a fractional dimension; a fractal to use Mandelbrot’s term.
Like the Mobean band of the early Lyotard, or the ‘smooth
space’ of Deleuze and Guattatri, it is a libidinal geometry
without inaccessible recesses, a topography without transcendent
repression.

The Menger sponge confronts us as an immobile quasi-solid
figure described (ungraspably) in space. This is intrinsic to its
mathematical or ideal character. It is mapped in a geometry it does
not disturb; concepts of space, time, abstraction, and infinity
remain uncontaminated. In this respect it is not a ‘labyrinth’ (in
Bataille’s sense); it admits of absolute transcendence, subordina-
tion, ideal objectivity. (It might nevertheless be a certain horizon of
lucidity.) Transcendental philosophy needs to be scaled, just as
chaos theory needs deepening transcendentally. Between real scales
there is always a difference of condition/conditioned, but this
difference is only ever scalar (never polar). Unlike a Menger
sponge the labyrinth cannot be expressed within a transcendent
grid, since it maps an uncircumscribable terrain of immanence.
Space and time find their construction ‘in’ the labyrinth, or
nowhere. Scale is an irreducible difference.

In the end there is only the voiding of volume, in which space
and time cooperate in utter continuity; chaos where everything is
spent. Nevertheless, a stellar silt is pasted across the void like




164 The thirst for annihilation


diseased skin, so that the ramifications of the sponge encrust death,
forming a surface without real depth, in distributing distances
across the scales. To ascend the sponge strata is to progressively
‘transcend’ a position towards the intensive construction in which
it is described. From superstructure/macrostructure to" infra-
structure/microstructure. Always a deeper infrastructure and a
shallower superstructure (one ascends into profundity, but profun-
dity is nothing but a complication of the shallows, and ‘one’ is
nowhere).

*

On the one hand two orientations or directions of focus,
macrostructure and microstructure, on the other two states or
qualifications of space, solidity and void. Between macrostructure
and microstructure is a relation or difference of analogy and
asymmetry. As compositions each stratum is analogous to the
other, but as strata one is dissymetrically composed by the other.
Macrostructure is real crudity or blur, but its reality is something
other than itself (‘it’ is blurred). Blur is real, but what is blurred is
reality (microstructure). That which is blurred is not something
other than blur, but what blur ‘itself’ is. Blur is real, death trapped
in confusion.

Void excludes solidity, but solidity does not exclude void. This
absence of reciprocity is the consequence of the fact that focus has
dissimilar consequences for plenitude and void. Void alone is ever
strictly focused, and is thus unilaterally absolute (death is perfect).
At any level of composition what appears as void is void, but what
appears as solidity is a compound involving the aggregate of the
unfocused; both unfocused solidity and unfocused void. In
appearance (a level of focus) void and solidity exclude each other,
but in reality (the unfocused of any level of focus, its micro-strata
of composition), solidity is contaminated by void. Death is
definitive, but life is indefinitely corroded by death. Solidity is in
reality void, but reality is impossible (and inevitable).

How is the relation between scale and its content to be
interpreted? The dependency of solidity upon blur seems to suggest
that the dissymetries of both couples align, and that compositional
ascension is generative of solidity. Blurring or scalar progression
would in this case be equivalent to a variable deviation from void,
so that composition is no longer thought of as static description,
but as dynamic accumulation. This is the description Bataille gives




The labyrinth 1 65


in The Accursed Share, Inner Experience, On Nietzsche, and elsewhere.
Growth is inextricable from the integrative impulse of scalar
progression, in which the hierarchy of predation and of composi-
tional organization are fused. Such a scale has a terminus but no
origin, as a symptom of its basic asymmetry. Regression is without
term, since there is always a subtilization of the tributary from
which the anticipations of solidity gather, as they flow into the
macrostructural basins of organization. Progression, however,
tends - irrepressibly — to empty itself into the sea. In other words
there is, as Bataille insists, a summit

If I now compare the constitution of society to a pyramid, it
appears as a domination on the part of the centre, of the summit
(this is a rough, even difficult schema). The summit incessantly
throws the foundation off into insignificance and, in this sense,
waves of laughter traverse the pyramid by gradually contesting
the pretence of sufficiency of the beings placed at a lower level.
But the first pattern of these waves issued from the summit flows
back and the second pattern traverses the pyramid from the
bottom to the top: the flowing back this time contests the
sufficiency of beings placed at a higher level. This contestation,
on the other hand, right up to the last instant, preserves the
summit: it cannot however fail to reach it. In truth, being,
without number, is in a certain sense suffocated by a
reverberating convulsion: laughter, in particular, suffocates no
one, but if I envisage the spasm of multitudes (whom one never
takes in with a single glance) the flowing back - as I have said -
cannot fail to reach the summit. And if it reaches it? This is the
agony of God in black night [V 107],

Imagine an irregular Menger sponge, scaling downwards in a
similar way to the Mandelbrot set, diversifying, and thus without
predictability across scales (except for that of protracted scaling
‘itself’). Once its differences have been stripped of periodicity it
must be impossible to return to the same. Something happens that
is like a becoming, liquifying matter/space into a mutating
complexity of flows, with differentiated vectors and speeds, still
recursively conserving detail. Currents drift across the omni-
surface, and within the currents are sub-currents, and within the
sub-currents . . . with each seeming to float on a pseudo-volume
generated by unresolved involutions of the sponge-plane. A force
floating in sponge-space has no determinate speed, but traverses




166 The thirst for annihilation


distances proportionate to a level of resolution; digressing with its
micro-components into complexities that indefinitely protract their
voyage. Any two points in sponge-space - whilst immanent to each
other - map out an unsimplifiable distance that cannot be
traversed at all scales in any given period. Contrary to anything that
a superficial similarity to Zeno’s paradox might suggest, this does
not result from the formal character of an argument, but rather,
from the material characteristics of a terrain.

Sponge-space is the positive impossibility of resolvable boun-
daries, and thus of discrete entities, decidable actions, un-
problematic vectors, logical identities, and adequate representa-
tions. There are no representations of any kind, but only floating
plates or scales, immanently distanced from each other by an
indeterminably convoluted surface. In sponge-space pure spatiality
cannot be demarcated from matter as a discrete concept, but
conspires with matter in the sole reality possible to either:
complexity. Distances are proliferated amongst the oceanic detritus
of a receding shore-line, with the prospect of an ideal univocity
diffused irreparably into the recurrent detail of base matter. ‘You
would not be able to imagine the degree of aberration to which it is
possible to arrive’ [II 405], Sponge-space is a ‘scale of beings’ [II
293], ‘scale of composition’ [II 305], or ‘scale of forms’ [II 293-4]
which does not tend to simplicity, ideality, or purity in either
direction, which never becomes cephalic, capped, teleological; a
headless axis of recession.


*

I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart. But you must
understand how to be a sponge if you want to be loved by
overflowing hearts [N II 325], Thus spoke Zarathustra.

*

Reason is rotted to bits in sponge-space, because all the polar
concepts which provide its structure depend upon the repression of
scaling differences. Form is infested by matter, the abstract by the
concrete, the transcendent by the immanent, space by time. (It is
not only ideal/real, actual/virtual, infinite/finite, simple/complex
that succumb, but also Euclidean/fractal, absolute/scaling, consis-
tent/sponge.) Life is infested by death; terminally infiltrated by the
unsuspendable reality of its loss. There is no integral identity or
alterity, but only fuzzy sponge zones, pulsing with indeterminable




The labyrinth 167


communicative potencies. Not merely lethal diseases, but the
disease of lethality; a labyrinth of contagion, knitted irresolvably
into death.

Chaotic ‘geometries’ (but they are not geometries), diseases,
fluids, war, vermin, and desire; all aspects of irreducible mess. A
mess that does not have the simplicity of amorphousness,
homogeneity, entropy, or consistent slime, no, this is a real mess;
imperfectible, unthinkable (even by negation). Mess is not liquid,
but differentially liquidated, fractional at each level between a solidity
and a liquidity that mean nothing on their own, a power of
infiltration that cannot be polarized. The parts of a liquid have
velocities, traced in geometric space, and polarized between
immobility and the rapidity of light, but the components of a
fluidification have speeds; spatializions, or differential rates of
becoming. These are recursive complications of geometry, ar-
bitrarily projectable as deviating from an energetic norm, il-
limitable in both scalar directions. Velocities can be represented
geometrically, but speeds ‘shape’ space. Which is to say; there is no
transcendental space, no spatiality that is ultimate - whether
‘highest’ or most ‘basic’ - no final grid, topology, or terrain, no
absolute geometry or legislative stratum. There are only scales in
which everything happens; a labyrinth which can never be ‘placed
in perspective’.

Space ‘itself’ is deep and twisted — a ‘mortuary abyss of
debauchery’ [IV 327] — which is not at all to suggest that it has
three dimensions. Its depth does not retreat from surface, except as
a maze-like complication. (Sponge)-space has the depth of
Nietzschean eternity; a depth of endless intrication hollowed by
recursion and a-synchronicity. Far from being synonymous with a
spatial dimension, the profundity of space stems precisely from the
impossibility of any geometric or cartographic master-position from
which scales could be plotted in consistent space. Nor can time be
exteriorized in relation to space, since both are co-effectuated as
recursivity, or incomprehensibly diffuse encroachment. It is not
any transcendentally spatialized objectivity, but spatiality ‘as such’
that is abyssally complicated through scaling.

I fall into the immensity

which falls into itself

it is blacker than my death [III 75].




168 The thirst for annihilation


The difference between transcendence and immanence is a matter
of volume and encroachment. In the recession through scales
volumes are dissymmetrically devastated by encroachments, and
yet sponge-space - as a ‘whole’ - never reverts to the simplicity of a
void. The unilateral erosion effected by real death corrupts being
with an interminable complication. Transcendence is similarly
powerless against the ferocious indifference of immanence; losing
every encounter, eroded a little further each time, but in a process
that never resolves into homogeneous negation.

The most philosophically rigorous discussion of this difference in
Bataille’s writings is to be found in his Theory of Religion, which was
probably written during the mid- to late 1940s, and appeared
finally in 1974. It is here that he most fully delineates his thought
of transcendence; a term which he consistently employs throughout
his more theoretical texts to designate the state of separation. As he
remarks:

The object . . . has a sense that breaks with indistinct continuity,
which opposes itself the immanence or to the flowing of all that
is - that it transcends. It is rigorously alien to the subject, to the
ego drowned in immanence [VII 298],

This is not to say that there is first an ego for which the object is
then separated by its transcendence, it is rather that ego and object
are simultaneous hypostatizations of interrupted flow. What could
an ‘I’ be that lacked all distinctness, haemorrhaging freely into
death, and lost in ‘immanent immensity, where there are no
separations, or limits’ [VII 306]?

All three of the traditional schemas of difference — logical,
empirical, and transcendental — presuppose the prior distinction
between subject and object. At the most straightforward this is
because, in their modern sense, all three have been historically
fixed in an epistemological usage (asking: how does a subject come
to know an object?). Transcendental philosophy sophisticates the
subject/object relation, but maintains its fundamental orientation,
such that Kant’s most celebrated achievement was to have
consummated epistemology (in a way that is inherited and trivially
readjusted by our contemporary philosophy of science). This is not
to suggest that the difference between subject and object remained
unquestioned between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries, on
the contrary; almost all the central concepts of philosophy in play
from Descartes to Kant have served at some stage to investigate




The labyrinth 169


and determine this difference. The question that remains repressed
in the history of Western philosophy up to Kant is not that of the
articulation between subject and object, but that of the difference
between the subject/object distinction itself (knowing) and inar-
ticulate or non-objective materiality (unknowing). At the apex,
with Kant, a reason is given for this silence, but the question as to
the real difference at the root of knowing is only raised in order to
be judged impossible, because difference (by this time) belongs
utterly to the internality of the subject.

Epistemology takes as its problem the relation of a subjective
representation to what is objectively represented - which might be
problematic (scepticism) or unproblematic (dogmatism), one of
difference (realism) or identity (subjective idealism) - but what is
evaded in this whole calculus of permutations is the relation
between knowing (subject/object separation) and what is not
knowing, or the sense of what escapes thought other than as an
unknown object, which is to say, other than as the real thing
‘behind’ the representation of the object (Kant’s noumenon is still
this). In order to differentiate between the real correlate of the
object, or epistemologically determined real substance, and the
unconditioned unknown, Bataille does not refer merely to matter,
but to base matter; a materiality so alien to the epistemological
framework that it is utterly without dependence upon the form of
the object (the thing).

The thing is the instance of a petrified separation - a fetish -
which represses both indistinct immanence and the difference from
indifferentiation. This is because the immanence buried beneath
the crust of things is the common but complex source of difference
in (intensive gradations of) transcendence; the generative materiality
in which everything real in transcendence must abysmally
participate, and from which every separation or isolation must
draw its force (but only in trailing an Ariadne’s thread that escapes
it; winding into obscure exteriority). Differentiation is continuity,
from which only sclerosed, formalized, or structuralized differences
depart, and depart only to the scale of their fictiveness. There is a
certain sense in which transcendence is untruth - a utilitarian
falsification or veil of Maya - and Bataille says of the thing that ‘ [i] t
is insofar that it is transcendence that it is fiction’ [VII 375], but
the premature exercise of such a judgement leaves immanence
stranded in the inertia of a being-in-itself, isolated from the process
of its falsification, and thus penned-back within its theological



170 The thirst for annihilation


determination as passive resource. It is important, therefore, to
emphasize that what is real in transcendence is not merely
immanence, but also the difference from immanence (which
remains immanent). The sense in which transcendence is real is
not the transcendent sense of reality, which is to say that reification
(emergence of things) is the reality of unreality, rooted not in
thought, or in any other transcendent faculty of falsification, but
rather in the differentiation of immanence; the knotted unconscious
complicity through which nature stratifies itself.

Insofar as the thing is false (transcendent) it does not derive its
sense from the real rupture which realizes its intensive deviation
from continuity, but from the inert articulations through which it is
related to other discrete beings. The price-mechanism of market
economies systematizes this tendency at the highest degree of its
possibility; instituting an automatism of reification that is fuelled
by its own consequences, so that it insinuates equivalences between
things ever more intricately into the fabric of the world.

*

Matter is stacked as transcendence, but if the relation of
transcendence to immanence can be described as ‘hierarchical’ it is
only by wrenching the word from its Nietzschean usage, and thus
employing the words metaphysically (without scaling). Where
Nietzschean hisrarchy — developing Schopenhauer’s ‘grades of
objectification’ - is a matter of strata, scales, compositional levels,
irresolvable tributaries open to the sea, labyrinthine in Bataille’s
sense, the so-called ‘hierarchy’ of binary difference, polarity, and
dialectic is infinitized and sterile. It is the whole of ‘Nietzschean’
hierarchy which is immanent (unilateral), whilst polar hierarchy
institutes transcendence. Or rather, the difference between im-
manence and transcendence has no absolute measure, but changes
its sense according to the site of differentiation. It can certainly be
construed transcendentally, as a definitive rupture of commensura-
tion, generating the ontology which Nietzsche incessantly mocks as
that of ‘the real and apparent world’. Such polar thinking
hypostatizes stratal difference into the concept of superiority as suck
(= God).

The strata of immanence transcend each other unilaterally -
‘overcome’ each other to persist with Nietzsche’s vocabulary - but
they do not transcend the materiality of scaling ‘as such’ (there is
no such thing). Not spirit but spiritualization ( Vergeistigung ); densely




The labyrinth 171


material throughout its process. In their immanent usage tran-
scendence and immanence mark out the directionalities of a
differention; relative serial co-ordinates, phases of intensity. They
are not determinate concepts, but pronominal traffic signals on
the intensive sequence, provoking exacerbations. Direction not
concept, experiment not approximation.

Although there can be no question of thought being adequate to
sponge-matter, this does not make the issue of its inadequacy an
uninteresting one. Adequacy exactly describes the ideal of an
absolutely depressive pole of economy; the absence of all
abbreviation. More fundamentally, the thought of adequacy is
construed within a vulgar realism, and is thus quite blind to the
convoluted surface of the sponge, upon which the tangled paths of
immanence are traced. Between thought and the sponge there is
not a relation of transcendence (epistemic representation), but one
of intricate texture.

Thought is not remotely comprehensible to a philosophy of
reflection, because it never grasps more than a surface of itself.
Thought is no more representable by an idealized limit than by a
general concept, since it has no privileged stratum of realization,
no horizon of subtilization. Every thought, intellectual synthesis, or
association of ideas is a pattern of convolution that is only ever
apprehended under conditions of indeterminable summarization.
Even the crudities and failures of thinking unfold upon the terrain
of an illimitable complexity. So it is not just that on the sponge-
matter surface the shortest distance between two points is
something other than a straight line. Such a distance is not even
finalizable. Crudity enables things to happen (contra Zeno), but
only under the conditions of an imperfection whose potentialities
for evolution escape definition.

*

A provisional differentiation is obviously possible between elemen-
tary sponges (such as Bataille’s groping example of the siphonophore)
and scaled sponges for which ‘ being is composed 1 [VII 265]
irreducibly (such as Menger’s). An elementary sponge might also
be a scaled sponge, but of an extremely disequilibriated kind. It
has a privileged stratum of fission, which is a threshold at which
death vertiginously transforms its sense. A siphonophore can be
dissolved to the level of its cells and still recompose itself, but
dissolution below this level annihilates it. In the same way, a hive




1 72 The thirst for annihilation


of bees or a colony of termites can be disaggregated without
irreparable damage, which does not hold for the dismemberment of
the individual insects composing them. Yet even in these cases the
matter is more compkx; sex cells, viruses, nutrient compounds,
and other components circulate upon differentiated strata, ir-
reducible to specifiable economies of life and death. The death of a
highly organized animal triggers a crisis across a large spectrum of
its biochemical composition, but it does not precipitate a return to
some zero-degree of chemical organization. Under ‘natural cir-
cumstances’ the compositional stock of such a creature is rapidly
plundered; its proteins and fats redistributed into new hierarchies
by scavangers of all kinds. Cultural organisms are able to treat
texts and other detritus of life in an analagous fashion.

Sade’s thought begins to stray into the labyrinth when he writes:

Now then, what value can Nature set upon individuals whose
making costs her neither the least trouble nor the slightest
concern? The worker values his labour according to the labour it
entails and the time spent creating it. Does man cost Nature
anything? And, under the supposition that he does, does he cost
her more than an ape or an elephant? I go further: what are the
regenerative materials used by nature? Of what are composed
the beings that come into life? Do not the three elements of
which they are formed result from the prior destruction of other
bodies? If all individuals were possessed of eternal life, would it
not become impossible for Nature to create any new ones? If
Nature denies eternity to beings, it follows that their destruction
is one of her laws. Now, once we observe that destruction is so
useful to her that she absolutely cannot dispense with it, and
that she cannot achieve her creations without drawing from the
store of destruction which death prepares for her, from this
moment onward the idea of annihilation which we attach to
death ceases to be real; there is no more veritable annihilation;
what we call the end of the living animal is no longer a true finis,
but a simple transformation, a transmutation of matter, what
every modern philosopher acknowledges as one of Nature’s
fundamental laws [S III 514],

What is crucial to the labyrinth, maze, or ‘composition of beings’
[II 293] is that the ‘word individual is not able ... to serve as a
designation for a degree of the scale of forms’ [II 293-4], Each
element is corrupted by an irreducible organizational fabric that




The labyrinth 173


opens across the difference of scale. ‘I am led ... to propose to
speak of aggregate [ amas ] if it is a matter of associations which do
not modify the parts forming it, of “composed beings” when it is a
matter of atoms, cells, or elements of the same order’ [II 295].
Simple animals such as sponges and starfish are characterized by a
relatively loose assemblage of cells, whilst linear animals — such as
insects or vertebrates - exhibit a ‘more complex mode of
composition’ [II 294] in which the organic elements succumb more
profoundly to their integration. In his early ‘sacred sociology’
writings Bataille employs the distinction between colonies and
societies to mark this difference between aggregated and scaled
multiplicities. A society is an assemblage or composition which
does not consist of individuals possessing a greater ontological
density than its own, and this absence of privileged scale meshes it
inextricably with death (the unrealizable zero of community). The
‘elements’ of a society are thus vampirically drained towards the
nuclear whole, just as they are agitated in their integrity by the
ineliminable flows at ‘a lower degree on the scale of composition’
[II 305], lending the labyrinth a ‘double aspect’ [II 292, 293],
Such particles — more spongiform than sponges themselves - are
irreparably violated by their constellation into the dissipative mass
of the labyrinth.

*

General economy is a traffic system; marking routes within the
complex immanence or quasi-horizontality that infests the axis of
transcendence. Every vertical difference is collapsible onto a
tangled horizontal flow. It is not that base materialism denies the
necessity of vertical articulation; there is no tendency to delete the
vocabulary of summits and troughs, differences in intensity,
compositional strata. The elimination of such an axis from
materialist thought would leave nothing but a theologically
constituted reality abandoned by God (a colony of particles).
Scaling is the positive superfluity of God inherent to matter, but its
gradations of relative transcendence must be commensurated with
an impersonal nature exhausting the real: genealogically rather
than metaphysically explored. The labyrinth is the unconscious of
God, or the repressed of monotheism. The illusion of ego in general
requires that it remain unthought. What God really was is
something incompatible with anything ‘being’ at all. Real
composition is not extrinsically created nature, but if this is a




1 74 The thirst for annihilation


Spinozism, it is one in which substance itself is sacrificed to the
scales. So that atheism is in the end (an end without end) an
immense sponge, a mega-sponge, the dissolution of boundaries in
all of its positive complexity. It is an inexhaustible porosity,
saturated with negation, pregnant with swarming lethalities, and
drunk upon the sea. Sponge-matter — encroached without limit by
silence - is the same thing as fate. In any traffic system real
transition precedes articulation (which means that there are no
boundaries, but only digressions). Sponge-vectors do not connect
pre-existing points, but spawn decomposable patches from out of
the subtilization of speeds and the intricate criss-crossing of routes.
Absolute points are transcendent mirages, hyperbolically projected
out of dismantled vector nets. The reality of space is only the
possibility of flow.

‘Were you to stop a short moment: the complex, the gentle, the
violent movements of worlds will make of your death a splashing
foam’ [V 112], writes Bataille. The word ‘death’ has the same mix
of referential richness and conceptual poverty as the sign lifting a
speed restriction. It would designate a concept only if this semiotic
transition were treated as the representation of absolute velocity,
rather than an incitement to free-flow. Dying is the departure from
a traffic system, but this emigration is not transcendentally
governed by a pure destination. The slipping-away of an animal
into death is no less intricately positive than the arterial pulse
pumping the blood from its heart. We are all fictional suicides,
some impatient, some less so, but all demonstrating by our
meticulousness the taciturnity of death. ‘In effect, death is nothing
in immanence, but due to the fact that it is nothing, no being is
ever truly separated from it’ [VII 308].

Death

answer

sponge streaming with solar
dreams [V 186],

*

And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled
it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink
[Matt XXVII 48],

And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink [Mark XV 36],




The labyrinth 175


they filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssoup, and
put it to his mouth [John XIX 29].

*

Dying is inextricable from the harsh flame of sexual torture in
which one is progressively consumed. It does not patiently await its
consummation, but gnaws at the base of the brain; grinding each
life into eroticized debris. Survival dissolves as a frangible dam
does — eroded to bits by the tumult of energetic rage - so that
sexual craving is the howl of nature’s fringe pounded into trash by
the sun.

Life is a scream which one cannot desire to ameliorate. It is rather that
one would exacerbate it. Agony alone has the power to seduce us,
and it is to our most savage torments that we most ardently cling.
We know that a life which was not torched into charcoal by desire
would be an unendurable insipidity. (Pain, however, remains pain.
A word that is easily written. Perhaps there is little point in
remarking upon it. One could imagine innumerable spurious
reasons for reiterating the word ‘scream’ for instance. That life
itself is filthy hurt . . . who could care about this being discussed?
‘Everyone and no-one’ as Nietzsche suggests?)

Eroticism would be impossible, if it were not that we know
ourselves to be an unuttered howl, a scream. Nothing is more
hypocritical than our public desexualization; the wretched urbanity
with which we have replaced communication. ‘Sexuality can be
survived’, we mutter with each dilute gesture, but of course, it
cannot. We prevaricate until secreted in a liquid space (so often
hidden at the lip of sleep) and then admit by our abandonments
that everything is pregnant with death.

*

My wish to vomit persisted. It hadn’t ceased, so to speak, since
the day before last. I went to look for a bottle of bad champagne.
I drank a chilled glass of it: after a few minutes I got up to go
and vomit. After vomiting I went back to bed, I was slightly
comforted, but the nausea wasn’t long in returning. I was
gripped by trembling and chattering of the teeth: I was
obviously sick, I suffered in a very bad fashion. I fell back into a
sort of fearful sleep: everything began to come unhooked, things
that were obscure, hideous, unformed, that it was absolutely
necessary to stabilize; there was no way to do so. My existence
came apart like rotten matter ... [Ill 425-6],




176 The thirst for annihilation


The semiology associated with ‘the death of the author’ is
formulated in terms of an antinomy of authority. It accepts a
question of intention, proceeds to resolve it negatively, and then
moves on to a theory of indeterminate significations which
valorizes the process of reading. What is at stake in the cruder
variants (Barthes) is a dialectic of authority which redistributes the
site of legislation from writer to reader. More intricate accounts
take things further, so that with Lacan and Derrida the position of
authority is itself subverted by the general text, in which the reader
as much as the author was always already enmeshed and
surpassed. In all of these cases death is thought of as the necessity
that something does not reach us, and could never reach us. The
transcendental impossibility of anything reaching us builds death
(/castration) into the movement of signification, as the arche-
absentiality that articulates/effaces base contact.

It is hard to imagine that anything could prevent Bataille’s
writing being flipped speculatively into this mirror space of
frustrated representation, but this does nothing to increase the
persuasiveness of such a move. If one is first prepared to think of
the death infesting Bataille’s writing as his death, in a gesture that
can then be transcendentally exacerbated to undermine the general
possibility of the proper, and thus of the ‘ownness’ of death, whilst
nevertheless retaining the pathos of a ruined presence, then
Bataille can indeed be deconstructed (with considerable technical
meticulousness). Nowhere in this procedure is the contagious
positivity of death touched upon (it is a matter of principle that
nothing is touched upon), nor its fluidity, intensity, explosive
impersonality, or solar luxuriance. Always the titillation of
suspended meaning, and never the impact of oblivion (loss is
thought as a deduction from anticipated lucidity, not as a variable
positive voracity). On the one hand death as the ultimate nostalgia
of signification, on the other death as the virulent flux of
communication.

It is not that Bataille or his signifying intentions are blocked by
death, it is rather that death is blocked by civilization in such a
way that it is (merely) represented as an impossible signification,
or as an impossibility of signification. That ‘Bataille’ should arise
as a hermeneutic topic, more or less problematized by the
empirical or transcendental death of the person, is itself the
symptom of a far more basic inhibition, operating at a level
continuous with impersonal death. In other words, death is not the




The labyrinth 177


principle of the ascetic law of representation, but the final term of
the forbidden. With every word that one writes about Bataille one
compounds a misunderstanding, contributing to an ordered
representation of crime and oblivion. It could be said that the issue
here is that of a paradox, but that is mere subordination to a
philosophical lexicon, and thus definitive resignation to an
accumulative outcome. More urgent by far is the mixture of nausea
and fear that accompanies the pre-philosophical impact of
Bataille’s dilemma; a vertiginous slippage upon the immanence of
death. It is then that one grasps every word, read or written, as a
desperate scrabbling for escape (from isolation).

‘The putting to death of the author by his work’, writes Bataille,
before quoting an astonishing passage from Proust in Inner
Experience. After doing so he resumes the thread:

The gods to whom we sacrifice are themselves sacrifice, tears
wept to the point of dying. This in Remembrance of Things Past
which the author would not have written if, broken with pain, he
had not yielded to that pain, saying: ‘Let us allow our bodies to
disintegrate . . .’ what is this if not the river, flowing in advance
to the estuary, which is the sentence itself: ‘Let us . . .’? and the
open sea into which the estuary empties is death. So much so
that the work was not only what led the author to his tomb, but
the way in which he died; it was written on his deathbed . . . The
author himself wanted us to feel him dying a bit more at each
line [V 175],

It is only when authors are something other than their death that a
literary theory can surgically excise them, when between ‘them-
selves’ and their inexistence no communication or continuity
occurs. The condition of impossibility for a theory of authorial
absentiality receives a precise nomination in Bataille’s text:
literature. One can readily accept that Bataille’s discursivity
comprises an analysable semiotic system, it remains only to note
one urgent fact: that such discursivity is the thing sacrificed by his
text.

Oeuvres completes de Georges Bataille is a discursive label. The
genitive is problematic, of course, as is the proper name, but so are
all the elements. Not only works , but complete works! It scarcely
seems probable. What do we find in these texts after all? Even at
the discursive level they seem to suggest that individuality,
creativity, and possession are illusions, that literature is something




1 78 The thirst for annihilation


quite other than work, and that completion is inevitably aborted.
They dramatize their gaps, absences, discontinuities, repudiate
their authenticity, contest themselves. The rafts of coherence one
finds are always adrift in disorder and confusion. Tortured
juxtapositions, fragments, and abandoned plans abound.

Techniques of disintegration operate at all levels of Bataille’s
text, tending to distribute it along an axis of maximal fission. The
extreme instance of this is the anorexic attenuation typical of his
poetry, where the line is stripped of almost all its semantic and
syntactic burden to enter into a vertical series of discontinuous
cries. The line collapses towards a resilient spinal core, along
which shrunken stanzas unstring themselves, like beads dropping
from a broken necklace into a dimension of intoxicating descent.
Other techniques include extended ellipsis, the employment of two
separate gears of paragraphing (with both indentations and
vertical line-breaks), violent narrative shifts of various kinds . . .
But in the end it is not a matter of technique. The fragmentation of
Bataille’s text cannot be domesticated within the subjective genitive.
Death ‘itself’ dissipates, aborts, fragments. Stories forestall comple-
tion, organization is lost, draft is spliced corrosively with
accomplishment.

Whose completion and whose work? Bataille’s? His editor’s?
Ours? As we have already glimpsed, there are innumerable
theories of the text which might intervene at this point, attempting
to persuade us one way or another. Some of these theories are even
genealogically contaminated by Bataille’s writings - although
never more than tangentially so - but what they tend to share
amongst themselves is a predisposition to an epistemological,
ontological, or ethico-political register, and a certain sanitary
distantiation from what matters to the text. The epistemophiliac
fixation proper to theory, with its attachment to security,
regularity, generalizability, and other cultural forms of insulation,
might lead to possible readings of Bataille, but not to a communication ;
a pestilential seduction by these ‘words purveyors of the plague’
[III 197]. Bataille is less an ‘interesting writer’ than a loathesome
vice, and to be influenced by him is less a cultural achievement
than a virological horror; far closer to the spasmodic rot of
untreated syphilis than to the enrichment of an intellect.

Any theorized ‘death of the author’ domesticates the infectious
wastage through which Bataille’s incompletion is spread. His is not
the immaculate absence of the semiologists, but a filthy death; as



The labyrinth 179


senselessly unmanageable as a scream. We are touched abysmally
by the very gesture that removes every authentic trace of ‘his
existence’ from us; his disappearance is a violent communion. In
the embers and smudges we inherit under the mark of Bataille
something is deliberated which subverts all possibility of delibera-
tion, as chance and failure are meticulously facilitated, and
teleology undoes itself at its peak. Strategy runs itself into chaos in
the incomprehensible zone where accidents are planned, and where
desire flows freely into loss (of control). Will to chance. Ashes to
ashes, mess to mess: a virulent irregularity continued into the
complexities of a literary estate, into a ‘chaos of books and papers’
[IV 192],

Death is a completion of sorts, one supposes. This is comforting
enough to believe, and thus almost certainly untenable. How
pleasant, to be rounded off by one’s abolition, to be edited by death.
This is a way of thinking similar to that of all those who assume
they will get better at death, that age will ease them gently into her
cold arms. This dream of soft passage is like that of tradition,
inheritance, legacy and memorial, conceiving writing on the model
of transmission. It is thought as if it were essentially something
received; offering itself successfully to the consummating fulfilment
of a deciphering (however tantalizingly problematical this may be).
Not only does such a model serve as an implicit apologetics for the
cultural commodity process, it also trivializes by idealization the
mute catastrophe of writing. That the immensely preponderant
bulk of writing is lost forever is not a mere empirical accident - far
less a phenomenologico-transcendental structure of non-presence -
but an effect inherent to the nihilistic core of the literary impulse.
At its root literature is writing for nothing', a pathological
extravagance whose natural companions are poverty, ill-health,
mental instability, and all the other symptoms of a devastated life
that is protracted in the shadow of futility. In the current
organization of civilization the facility of contacting a text is - at
the very least - radically accidental with respect to its literary
intensity. The bare minimum of honesty requires an acknowledge-
ment that literature is spent almost entirely unattended. It is as
foreign to us in our social being as an earthquake beneath the
sea.


*


Confronting the absolute posed by our inevitable extinction, we feel




180 The thirst for annihilation


brave, proud of ourselves, we permit ourselves a little indulgence,
swooning in the delectations of morbidity. To face up to death is
more than the others do, our haunted grimace becomes a complacent
smile, we run our hands lovingly over the lichen-spattered graves.
It is as if we have done our share, as if it were now up to death to
make some gesture of reciprocation, of gratitude. How thankful
death will be that we accept it so, it will surely favour us for
treating it so tolerantly. We even imagine it as an outcast, rejected
by all, miserable, hungry, endlessly appreciative of the benefactor
who takes it in. Thus it is that death becomes cut to our
dimensions, becomes our death, a friend, a little ominous perhaps, a
little bleak-hearted, but limited by the modest horizon of its task;
that of bringing a definitive end to ourselves. We sit on tombs and
imagine the corpse within lying alongside its death, the two of
them, snuggled together as lovers, mutually satiated by the
perfection of their symmetry. What fidelity death shows! What
simplicity to its desires! And how cruelly it is spurned! In the final
phase of this insanity we find ourselves choked with pity for our
dark and neglected twin.

How gentle and soothing, if death were really nothing but
ceasing to be, but is there such a thing as ‘mere death’? Were there
to be we would never learn of it, for it is only in over-reaching itself
that death leaves a script. What greater mistake than confusing our
death with non-being? Is it because we want to believe in the
loyalty of our substance that we make this peculiar equation? If so,
we should be ashamed of our dishonesty. The facts are blatant: it is
not the case that death leaves matter satisfied. At most it is a
temporary refreshment, a cool black wave for matter to bask in like
a reptile, a phase of dormancy, before the rush back into the
convulsive dissipation of life. Perhaps we feel that our deaths
should be more fulfilling, that they should be important enough to
quench the most insensate thirst. It is almost as if we still believe in
the faithful resurrection of the flesh. How humiliating then that
matter remains itchy after shaking us from it, that it is still eager,
that even before our mourners have forgotten us it is flirting with
the worms . . . Across the aeons our mass of hydro-carbon enjoys a
veritable harem of souls.


*


How much dying can a body do? At least one dose, and even this
figure is conservative except in the case of the most elementary life.




The labyrinth 181


A more complex organism is a true economy of death, running ofT a
perpetuated inner catastrophe, shedding its cells into the ocean of
ruin. It is the crudest type of error to reserve the word death for
total systemic collapse: for the end of dying. Human bodies do not
echo the neuroses that inhabit them, staving off disintegration,
clutching at postponement, sealing death out, no, they glut
themselves on death, traders in devastation, turning themselves
over from within.

Matter is in flight from the possibility of essence as if from an
original pertinency of ontology, and life is merely the most aberrant
and virological variant of this flight; the convulsive fringe of being’s
relinquishment. Life is an exploration of death, whose motor is an
exteriority from which it can never separate itself. It comes closest
to co-extension with a principle in its deviation from the echoes of
real essence; in its turnover or metabolism. Life smears itself across
death as the migration from concrete existence; the meanderings of
an ever accentuated vagrant reproducibility through confusion.

‘No particle is the same’, we happily admit, when discussing a
body differentiated from itself by a few years. We try not to
understand that we are thus accepting the final abandonment by
complex life of all allegiance to existence. Life evolves into the
embrace of death, becoming a mere turbulence of disappearance,
indifferent to its pullulating inner mass, to its inner ruthlessnesses
... To be part of an organism is to become dispensable, and ever
more dispensable. No course is more suicidal than that of the living
substance that becomes an organ. Bataille writes of the human
being for ‘whom the components die incessantly (such that none of
the elements that we were subsists beyond a certain number of
years)’ [V 98],

We are still determined to believe that we have one single and
conclusive death awaiting us, a death tailored to the dimensions of
a soul. But if a body is a river of death, what makes us so sure ‘a
self’ isn’t one? Is it likely that ‘we’ should really remain the same?
It is the most elementary common sense to believe in our existence
of course, but then, would it really be convenient for the body to
admit to the ephemera in its nerves that it has so little attachment
to them?


*


Animals of the species homo sapiens - it is rashly suggested - ‘know
that they are going to die’. Bataille claims so on a very great




182 The thirst for annihilation


number of occasions. If this is so it is perplexing why they act as
they do. Nowhere outside humanity is the indefinite postponement
of life - named differance in recent times - developed to such a pitch
of wretchedness. Which amongst our gestures would remain
unchanged if it were to be the last? No impulse amongst us that is
not a hesitation. No adventure without reserve.

The relation between being and death is commonly understood
in one of two ways. Either existentially, such that death is thought
of as an absolute loss of being-in-the-world, or naturalistically,
such that being is considered to be utterly unimpaired - merely
rearranged — by death. For the implicit existentialist (who is
everyone in their moments of naivety) both being and death belong
absolutely to that scale consistent with the totality of the human
person, whilst for the naturalist being recedes towards a level of
fundamental elements, a level at which ‘death’ is always extrinsic.
Heideggerian death is an absolute ontological horizon, whilst
thermodynamic heat-death (comprehending all natural deaths) is
merely energy-conserving disorder.

With Bataille things are different. ‘Being is nowhere ’ [V 98],
Which is to say, it has no privileged scale, no refuge, either in the
atom or in the totality. From the perspective of ontology the
compositions at each scale are gnawed by insufficiency; both too
friable and too partial to be. Being would be other to death — either
annihilated by it or left immaculate — were there not scales.

If there were not scales, death would be so sublimely
metaphysical. Take Aquinas for instance. There is no gesture
exhibiting a greater fidelity to theology than the differentiating
stroke with which he distinguishes decomposition from annihila-
tion. Along with such a difference comes the entitlement to an
entire flora and fauna of theistic distinctions: soul/body, essence/
accident, creation/metamorphosis, etc. The scales as a whole are
grouped together upon the ontological fundament of divine
conservation, within which empirical death circulates as an
obedient angel of the Lord.

Aquinas’ reason is of crystal clarity:

what is created comes out of nothing [ex nihilo]. Now composite
things [composita] come out of their components [componen-
tibus], not nothing, and therefore it is not them exactly that are
created [A VIII 41]

matter [materia] underlies natural production, and consequently




The labyrinth 183


it, and not the concrete thing composed of it [compositum], is
what, properly speaking, is created [A VIII 41],

A simple bilateral disjunction between being and nothing propels
Aquinas’ thinking here. The economy of being operates within a
consistent conservative action, monopolized by an extrinsic author
who interdicts any impulse on the part of nature to a direct
collaboration with zero. Compositional strata are quarantined from
logical differentiations; ghettoized in the sordid slums of a creation
that is paternalistically comprehended by divine reason. ‘God is
the cause of things through his mind and will, like an artist of
works of art’ [A VIII 53],




Chapter 11


Inconclusive communication


‘I am so weak sometimes that I lack the strength to write. The
strength to lie? I must put it like this: the words that I align lie. I
wouldn’t write on the walls, of my prison: I would have to tear
out my nails to seek the issue.

‘Write? turn one’s nails against oneself, hope, completely
uselessly, the moment of deliverance?

‘My reason to write is to reach B ./

‘That which would consummate despair [Le plus desesperant]:
that B. loses in the end the thread of Ariadne which is - in the
maze of her life - my love for her’ [III 113-14],

The Active and the literary do not run parallel to the theoretical in
Bataille’s writing, it is perhaps better to think of them as
dramatizing the untruth of theory, if the relation is to be theorized
at all. One might say that at the level of writing theory is a
constricted species of fiction, in the same way that the actual
constricts possibility (but what matters is the impossible). It is thus
that one would acknowledge that epistemic factors are secondary to
textual generativity, in a manner that has come to be described as
‘postmodern’. Even in Bataille’s terms, insofar as a Freudian
lexicon might be adequate to them, it could be persuasively
suggested that it is only when a narrative is rigorously disciplined
by the reality principle that a theoreticization emerges in
consequence, whereas the unfettered movement of the primary
process is of a spontaneously literary character. Literature is not
primordially a matter of effort, any more than love or dying are.
Theory - on the other hand - is work.

At the beginning of The Accursed Share, for example, Bataille
explicitly subtracts all dignity from the theoretical impulse of his
work. He remarks that ‘my work tends first of all to increase the sum





Inconclusive communication 185


of human resources, but its results teach me that accumulation is
nothing but a delay, a retreat from the inevitable discharge
[echeance], when accumulated riches will have no value save that of
the instant’ [VII 20], There is — in the end — no reason to delay
beginning upon one’s death, even though such a delay is reason
itself. With such a statement discourse runs itself into the sand,
anticipating an end to all theory that will always come from
without. It is because theory only exists as a fiction, a unilateral
deviation from solar howl, that it continues; impotent even to
terminate itself. ‘A book that no one awaits, that does not respond
to any formulated question, that the author would not have written
if he had followed its lesson to the letter, here is the peculiarity
[ bizarrerie ] that I propose to the reader today’ [VII 21].

The process of unbinding that is misleadingly named production
takes place within a general field of expenditure, of which it is a
specification. Due to the fact that it is initiated by a preliminary
loss, production is always (excessive) replenishment, and not the
simple occurrence of plenitude. Defaults in production subside
towards a base of erosive profligacy, rather than to the security of
inertia. Rooted in lava and earthquake, the production process is
condemned to the hazards of an inescapable volatility.

The first paragraph of Economy to the Scale of the Universe ends with
an utterance that dissolves into inconclusiveness; ‘the energy that I
expend now in writing . . .’ [VII 9]. Whatever the operations of
substitution, appropriation, and extraction that are brought to bear
on Bataille’s (or any other) text, loss has already happened. Whilst
growth is juggled precariously into the future, speculated upon,
and projectively developed, death is a fact. The text is initiated in
the consummation of waste.

Writing shares in the sub-ontological delirium of the universe,
and is primordially expenditure. But it is also to a large extent
dominated by the superordinate terrestrial strata of production and
reason; primary and secondary utility. Bataille names writing
discourse insofar as it conforms to the order of utility. When it
betrays, corrodes, and liquidates utility - regressing to the burning
lava-flow of its base materiality - he names it literature. ‘Literature
is the essential, or it is nothing’ [IX 171], Bataille writes in the
introduction to Literature and Evil. Unless literature is the
termination of sense, the reef at the end of words, it is a mere
ornamentation of discourse. The radical inutility of literary
language is not to be excused by epistemic, ideological, or moral




186 The thirst for annihilation


apologetics (such as those that dominate current critical debate)
but exacerbated to the point of collapse, because ‘[literature is
communication ’ [IX 171]. A literary destiny that is not an
immolation is an insipidity. Fiction is a betrayal of being, but one
that is uncircumscribed by the order of the real. ‘The worst thing
was to be at the point where, by an obscure fatality, each thing is
taken to the extreme, and to feel myself, at the same time, released
by life’ [III 282]. Being (conservation) is the essence of utility and
the highest principle of reason. Fiction, on the contrary, is loss. If
literature has a value it can only be interpreted as prestige, such as
that emerging from the potlatch of aboriginal economies; a glory
that is the same as horror. Having broken with all fidelity to
existence, fiction belongs amongst what is toxic and accursed upon
the earth.

The only means of compensating for the offence of writing is the
annihilation of what is written. But that cannot be done except
by the author; destruction leaving the essential intact, I am able,
nevertheless, to bind negation so tightly to affirmation that my
quill effaces in like measure that which it advances [ efface a
mesure ce qu’elle avanqa]. It effects therefore, in a word, that which
is generally effected by ‘time’, - which, of its multiplied edifices,
lets nothing subsist except the traces of death. I believe that the
secret of literature lies here, and that a book isn’t beautiful
except when skilfully ornamented by the indifference of ruins
[III 336],

Fiction is initiated in an annihilation of the world, but one that is
at first isolated. Such writing is a darkness that is itself germinated
in the dark; emerging fungally in a blackness that normally
extinguishes it. In its contempt for the security of things, literature
is sullied by a sacred character, and is nothing beyond the
possibility of deeper contact than that offered in profanity.
Nevertheless, the encapsulating space of the profane world
oppresses it with the full weight of being; imprisoning it in the
spectre of interiority. In this way the ‘inherent’ density of literature
is bound to the fate of an address. Literature cannot be analysed
beyond the common predicament of an utterance and its
promulgation: beyond the fatality of communion.

From the side of theory there is an interpretation of literature as
epistemic collapse, whilst from the side of literature there are
stories about work as an imprisonment. This is not to suggest that




Inconclusive communication 187


Bataille’s fiction involves a workerist ideological critique, far less a
social realism. Any earnestness of this sort would be the most
abject submission to the ethic of production, and miss the crucial
point, which is that Bataille fails utterly as a writer, a fact that is
not speculatively redeemed by the way failure finds a voice in his
work. That his writings communicate powerfully, propelled by
unparalleled resources of insinuation, attests merely to the
virulence of futility, and not to any subterranean productivity of
the negative. It is rather that his characters intricate themselves
into the dissolution of narrativity, forestalling its restoration as a
contingently unrealized aesthetic aspiration. Bataille’s fictions lose
themselves (ungraspably) within themselves, rather than merely
succumbing to an intelligible derailing. ‘I imagined having myself
condemned to silence, in an indefinite pain, as great as words . . .’
[Ill 166]. There is no redemption through literature, but only a
deepening horror and delight, which at some indiscernible mazing
of the labyrinth crosses over . . .

Whatever the differences - and they are immense - between The
Story of the Eye and Bataille’s later fiction, or between his novels and
his poetry, there is a consistent tone to his literary writings, a
darkness, ‘collapse of being into the night’ [IV 23]. Not only are
nocturnal scenes abnormally prevalent, but their effect is com-
pounded by the interwoven themes of the unavowable, the unholy,
and alcoholic oblivion. Base sexuality, sickness, religion, and
intoxication entwine about each other in these texts, as withered
creepers and roots might do as they cascaded into a chasm full of
bats. A delirial fracturing presses the dominant thematic flows to
the point of narrative discontinuity; shattering the aspiration to
literary accomplishment, and collapsing its remains in amongst the
embers of characters who cannot complete themselves. A sterilizing
malaise dithers between narrative content and the process of
writing. Sketches, fragments, ruptures, suicides, drunks, impossible
desires and the burning thirst to be damned . . . this is a world of
wrecked art, nihilistic love, and death triumphant; pervaded
throughout by a hideous allure. In The Story of the Eye Bataille
writes of ‘everything that is bound to profound sexuality, for
example blood, suffocation, sudden terror, crime, everything that
indefinitely destroys human beatitude and decency’ [I 15].

*

That which one qualifies with the name love when one seeks to




188 The thirst for annihilation


determine the disinterested elements of life is nothing but a
fragmentary representation of assemblages of impulses which are
put in movement as soon as an object is found outside the
normal course of things where everything is indifferently
identifiable. Love - being nothing ordinarily than the conscious
part of those assemblages — opposes itself to identification (to
knowledge) of the object, which is to say that its object is
necessarily charged with a heterogeneous character (analogous
to the character of the blinding sun, excrements, gold, sacred
things) [II 141].

Literature is like love in that both are catastrophic diseases. The
way literature wantonly exploits the resources of base physiology is
like love, as is the way it allies itself with hunger, sleeplessness,
malaise, and strange fevers; derailing lives, and undoing the most
methodical projects. Love introduces the taste of abjection and the
gutter into the most secure of existences, breaking open infer-
iorities, until it finally gets its wretched sacrifices down onto the
floor, from where they are pitched into the abyss of supplication
without possible reponse, choking on a sulphurous mixture of ecstasy
and despair. There is no great literature that is not simultaneously
a degradation and a burning futility. It is no coincidence that
literature has been a perpetual tortured erotic stammering, whose
aesthetic momentum flows from the fact that ‘beauty alone . . .
renders tolerable the need for disorder, violence, and indignity that
is the root of love’ [III 13].

There is certainly no ‘philosopher’, and perhaps there is no
writer of any kind, who has more recklessly explored the dark and
extravagant terrain of erotic love than Bataille. It is not only that
his fictions and poems are saturated with the erotic, since Eroticism,
The History of Eroticism, and Tears of Eros, etc. are all ‘theoretical
works’, but nor is it that this ‘theme’ is extended in a
circumscribed fashion into certain non-literary texts. It would be
tempting to suggest that - as the fusion of sexuality and death -
eroticism was the keystone of Bataille’s entire work, were it not
that it is incommensurable with self, completion, and achievement.
Eroticism certainly communicates itself into the most tangled
vacuolizations of Bataille’s writing, melding heterogeneous terms
into viral constellations, and messing everything up, but then:
‘ “[communication” is love, and love defiles those it unites’ [VI 43],




Inconclusive communication 189


Every production and articulate word, every morsel of nourish-
ment, every second of sleep, is an atrocity against love and a
provocation to despair. Erotic passion has no tolerance for health,
not even for bare survival. It is for this reason that love is the
ultimate illness and crime. Nothing is more incompatible with the
welfare of the human species. ‘I search only for the terror of evil’
[IV 219], writes Bataille, in his adherence to the violent refusal of
integral being. ‘Evil is love’ [III 37], ‘the need to deny an order
with which one is unable to live’ [III 37], The terrestrial
problematic at its most furious finds a useless undoing in eroticism,
so that the descent into love is also fundamental economy, which is
perhaps a tragedy, or a joke (something truly hideous and sacred in
any case).

That the root of love is a thirst for disaster is exhibited
throughout its erratic course. At its most elementary love is driven
by a longing to be cruelly unrequited; fostering every kind of
repellent self-abasement, awkwardness, and idiocy. Sometimes this
provokes the contempt that is so obviously appropriate, and the
tormented one can then luxuriate in the utter burning loss that
each gesture becomes. One wastes away; expending health and
finance in orgies of narcosis, breaking down one’s labour-power to
the point of destitution, pouring one’s every thought into an abyss
of consuming indifference. At the end of such a trajectory lies the
final breakage of health, ruinous poverty, madness, and suicide. A
love that does not lead such a blasted career is always at some
basic level disappointed : ‘to love to this point is to be sick (and I love
to be sick)’ [III 105]. Yet there are times in which the morbid
horror of love infects the beloved, or one is oneself infected by the
passion of another, or two strains of love collide, so that both spiral
together into a helix of strangely suspended disintegration, cheated
of innocent disaster. Each competes to be destroyed by the other,
drifting into the hopeless ecstasies that follow from the severing of
all moorings, attempting to exceed the other in mad vulnerability.
When propelled by an extremity of impatience this too can lead to
suicide of course, but such an outcome is uncommon. The
adequate pretext for such a conclusion is lacking, since the capacity
to wound is melted from the world, which becomes a softened -
and often almost imperceptible - backdrop, whilst the beloved,
who is invested with such a capacity to a degree inconceivable to
the utilitarian mind, strives entirely to annul it. Thus it is that the
lovers conspire to protect each other from the lethal destiny of their




1 90 The thirst for annihilation


passion, either succeeding in this, and relapsing into the wretched
sanity of mutual affection, or compacting their fever to new
scratch-patches of intensity. In the latter case all legible charts are
lacking, and if the real has a splinter-fringe of utter exploration this
is it . . .

. . . Sickness is something I understand. My corpse trembles in a
euphoria of allergy each day that it drags itself across the surface of
the earth. The weather ravages me, my joints become inflamed,
ankylose, my lungs are shredded and torched to the point that they
scarcely resist any longer, my skin is greenish pale, and the sockets
of my eyes are withdrawn into black pits of foulness. As for my
nervous-system — charred and three-quarters unstrung - that is my
true pathological exhibit. No movement that does not seem like the
twitching of an animal tortured to the brink of collapse, no thought
that is not an experiment in damnation. Between ecstasy and
torment there is no longer an interval of moderation; there is not
even an alteration. I writhe on the spit of a devastated vitality,
laughing with hunger for each ratcheting of descent . . .

I have the hope of coming to the end of my health, perhaps even

to the end of a life without reason to be [III 414],

*

The only honest words? The only words with integrity?

There are none. Only silence and pain (and even then there is
still corruption).

To speak of eroticism is to be skewered upon pretence; sinking
into either artificial passion or parodic discourse. What point in
trying to persuade you (were it true) that each word is an inverse
fake orgasm, a pseudo-lucidity, a howl trapped in the throat? The
endeavour to let love speak merely fosters the pathetic delusion
that it is unnecessary to die, as if individuated existence were
capacious beyond the banality of being.

I pace around - a fiction of course - relentlessly agitated by the
impossible, drinking another unwanted drink, tempted by in-
numerable evasions. There is no reason to resist them, there is
simply no reason, but for a while I resist, or at least, they are
resisted. The disgust I feel for every word I write almost suffocates
me. I am unsure whether I feel physically sick. Vague nausea
teeters on the brink of a faint, but it is also a strange delight.




Inconclusive communication 191


According to Bataille eroticism is the ‘extreme emotion’ which
‘opposes the human to the animal’ [X 584], The animal is ignorant
of death and law — ‘for an animal nothing is prohibited’ [IX 33] -
and is driven into its sexuality by ‘the blind instinct of its organs’
[X 593], The human being, in contrast, is the only morbid animal ;
haunted by its prospective disappearance, caged in prohibitions,
and relaying its drives through a ‘calculus ... of pleasure’ [X 593],
‘Man has a thirst for evil’ [III 42].

Bataille’s obsession is with ‘the unity of death, or of the
consciousness of death, and eroticism’ [X 585], which he also
describes as the ‘essential and paradoxical accord’ of ‘death and
eroticism’ [X 597], and ‘the intimate accord between life and its
violent destruction’ [II 247], a cohesion that finds fragmentary
attestation in the writings of Sade, in the trajectory of psycho-
analysis, and perhaps most pointedly, in the characterization of
orgasm within the French language as the little death. ‘Volup-
tuosity is so close to ruinous dilapidation that we call its moment of
paroxysm the “little death”’ [X 170], leading to a question as to
‘the identity of the “little death” and a death that is definitive’ [X
577]. This is a matter both of identity and difference, of unilateral
difference, or of scale. Orgasm provisionally substitutes for death,
fending-off the impetus towards terminal oblivion, but only by
infiltrating death into the silent core of vitality. ‘It is true: speaking
within the utilitarian limits of reason, we perceive the practical
sense and the necessity of sexual disorder. But were those who gave
the name “little death” to its terminal phase . . . wrong to have
perceived its funereal sense’ [X 586]? The little death is not merely
a simulacrum or sublimation of a big one - of a true and virginal
inexistence - but a corruption that leaves the bilateral architecture
of life and death in tatters, a communication and a slippage which
violates the immaculate alterity of darkness. Eroticism traces out
the labyrinth, the maze, the riddle, from which death cannot be
precipitated into lucidity. Death is enmeshed irresolvably in
confusion. ‘If the result of eroticism is envisaged under the
perspective of desire, independently of the possible birth of a child,
it is a loss, to which the paradoxically valuable expression “the
little death” responds. It is not obvious what the “little death” has
to do with death, with the cold horror of death . . . But is the
paradox displaced whilst eroticism is in play?’ [X 592].

‘My rage to love opens onto death as a window onto a courtyard’
[VI 76], because death is the only place we profoundly touch each




1 92 The thirst for annihilation


other. ‘And death is not mine alone. We all die incessantly. The little
time that separates us from emptiness has the flimsiness of a
dream’ [VI 155], Intimacy is not fusion, but unless it is the lip of
fusion, it is nothing. Like eroticism, literature is communication,
and communication is opened by death alone (but in the end
everything is death, even the confusion that encrusts it). This is
why to love is to bleed, which is not due to the pain of lack, but to
excess. ‘Erotic conduct opposes itself to the habitual kind, as
expenditure to acquisition’ [X 169], It is only in an unrestrained
debauching of the means to live that the desolate expanses of
continuity are reached. ‘We have no true pleasure except in
expending uselessly, as if a wound opens in us’ [X 170]. The
impoverished bond of social connectedness is broken on the reef of
deep community, where fusion is consummated in the impossible,
‘it is under the condition of rupturing a communion that limits it
that eroticism finally reveals the violence which is its truth’ [X
167]. Only in a betrayal of life is there merging. ‘The truth of
eroticism is treason’ [X 170],

Sade’s reasoning on this question is of Thomisitic limpidity.
Juliette follows a familiar Sadean path when she argues that
however extraordinary the agony of another being, and however
immense the number of such beings plunged into suffering, or
death, they nevertheless remain utterly other, and their pain
irrelevant. ‘It doesn’t matter at all if your neighbour undergoes a
painful sensation, if there results none for you’ [S IX 50], If the
torments of such unfortunate creatures impinge at all it is only due
to the effects of convention - the servile dimension of the self - and
such sensations should not be erroneously commensurated with the
immediate (therefore natural) sensuality of crime. The slightest
hint of immediate pleasure refutes an infinity of alien suffering. The
pains of others register not at all, except insofar as one participates
in the mutilation of nature, whose conventional name is ‘con-
science’. This is the notorious ‘solipsism’ of Sade, the affective
denial of the other’s subjectivity through a negation which he calls
‘indifference’. Pain that is not one’s own is to be coldly
disregarded, since ‘between it and your pleasure there is no
proportion’ [S IX 50], He takes this argument to a dramatic
climax: ‘there is nothing to balance, even between a sugared
almond and the entire universe. This reasoning serves to
demonstrate the immense advantages of vice over virtue’ [S IX
50],




Inconclusive communication 193


What remains is to acknowledge such remarks as a communica-
tion, as Bataille does, attentive to the ‘tears of blood’ [IX 243]
Sade wept upon the loss of his 120 Days of Sodom. Sade’s characters
are no more trapped in an interior monologue than their author. It
is not to herself, but to the beautiful young woman to whom she is
erotically bound that Juliette declares:

The excess of your sensibility is extreme, but you have directed
its effects in a manner such that it is no longer able to carry you
anywhere except into vice. All exterior objects which have some
type of singularity put the electric particles of your nervous fluid
into a prodigious irritation, and the disturbance, received upon
the mass of nerves, communicates itself instantaneously to those
which border upon the centre of voluptuousity. You immediately
sense ticklings there, that sensation pleases you, you pander to it,
you renew it; the force of your imagination makes you conceive
of its augmentation, of details . . . the irritation becomes more
lively, and you thus multiply, if you want, your pleasures
towards infinity. The essential object is therefore, for you, to
extend, to aggravate ... I am going to say something to you that
is a good deal stronger: because having surmounted all barriers
as you have, being no longer restrained by anything whatsoever,
it is necessary for you to go far. What henceforth inflames your
imagination, therefore, will not be anything except the excess
which is strongest, most execrable, the most contrary to divine
and human law [S IX 47].

The ultimate intelligible term of the erotic is not that one negates
the other in the interests of self-gratification, but rather that one
violates a world which obstructs erotic contact, relinquishing all
attachments before the predatory puissance of the beloved. Erotic
love is an unrestrained violence against everything which stands
against communion, and thus against everything that stands; a
sacrificial spasm that violates God, cosmos, one’s fellows and one’s
self, in a movement of donation without reserve. As Bataille
remarks: ‘at the summit the unlimited negation of otherness is the
negation of self’ [X 173].

The horror of Sade’s writing is not to be dismissed by such
words. If the cage of discrete being were to be the sole tribunal of
his loathesome insatiation there could be little doubt as to the
rigour of the condemnation. Perhaps no one has betrayed life with
the ardour he has, unless Bataille, or myself. Sade writes:




1 94 The thirst for annihilation


Has an individual’s death ever had any influence upon the
general mass? And after the loss of the greatest battle, what am I
saying? after the obliteration of half the world - or, if one wishes,
of the entire world - would the little number of survivors, should
there be any, notice even the faintest difference in things? No,
alas. Nor would Nature notice any either, and the stupid pride of
man, who believes everything created for him, would be dashed
indeed, after the total extinction of the human species, were it to
be seen that nothing in Nature had changed, and that the star’s
flight had not for that been retarded [S III 517].

This is a cold passage, lacking the resources of noxiousness with
which his writings are usually so lavishly endowed. Its profound
inhumanity is nevertheless beyond question. There is a particular
scaling of death that is close to Sade, a numerical hypertrophy that
tips orgy into massacre. Witnessing the unparalleled scenes of
atrocity that litter his stories one is horrified of course, but to recoil
in horror is to succumb anxiously to an erotic attachment. Nor is
this only a literary matter.

However great the revulsion that can be felt in contact with a
single corpse, especially when it is in an advanced state of
decomposition, or marked with the traces of an ignoble extremity
of agony (torture in particular), this is massively augmented — and
not merely quantitatively — when one is confronted by heaps or
mounds of corpses; the stacked remains of an ossuary, the human
remnants from an extermination camp, piles of skulls, anonymous
tangles of bodies in the Ugandan bush or at the edge of a
Kampuchean paddy field. The corpse not as a lost person, but as a
disintegrating clot in the depersonalized refuse of death. Sade’s
writings are not without such images, but nor are the mass media
of twentieth-century societies. It is only at the lip of such abysmal
indignities, when bodies are vomited as faceless masses of
Herakleitean dung, that one glimpses the filthy and senseless death
one craves.

Whatever the monstrosity of Sade, he does not point into
Auschwitz; it is more true to suggest that he points out of it.
Despite the peculiar desperation in our attempts to give a moral
interpretation to the somatic shock induced by traces of the Nazi
exterminations, our intellectual conscience remains offended by the
sanctimonious inanities that ensue. We treat Hitler as a persuasive
Satan, a figure that the church was unable to invent, in whom we




Inconclusive communication 195


vicariously live our evil (as if we were masturbating over a
magazine). In the aggregate, our squalid separation from the
victims gapes its stale complacency. Our lurch for innocence seals
us against communion, and we are repulsed from the place where
their fate is also ours, as if death itself has been soiled by their
torments. That we are an ineliminably massacreable species of
animal scarcely marks us. We engineer an apartheid of the dead.
Partly this is due to the widespread dread of corpses, Jews,
Gypsies, and homosexuals prevalent in our societies. All of which
elements are consigned by morality to the same howl-choked
dungeon as desire, irresponsibility, and profound contact with the
real. Our moral natures would complete the sanitization of the
1940s’ pogroms, contributing to the elimination of sprawling
bodies, and of the problematic affects they provoke. We are even
stupid enough to believe that between a KZ guard and a young
Jew treading the edge of a death factory it is the latter who is most
profoundly caged.

The technical core of the final solution was not merely an
apparatus for mass killings, but one that was also guided by the
exigency of the utile disposal of corpses. We simplify out of anxiety
when we conflate the mounds of emaciated bodies strewn about the
camps at the point of their liberation - the bodies of those
annihilated by epidemics during the collapse of the extermination
system — with the reduced ash and shadows of those erased by the
system in its smooth functioning. The uneliminated corpse is not a
submissive element within this or any other ‘final solution’, but an
impersonal resistance to it, a token of primordial community. The
docility of the inert body is itself a fascist myth.

The final solution is a myth and a fact; each of its traces being
invested by complex libidinal forces. The lamp-shades made from
human skin, the meticulously salvaged heaps of dentures and
artificial limbs, the calm efficiency of the Nazi genocide-bureaucrat:
all are freely circulating tokens of powerful affect. None of these
images is more extraordinarily wounding to our sense of cosmic
order than the bars of soap made from the body fat of the
exterminated, the transubstantiation of verminized flesh into an
implement of hygiene; white, glistening, malleable, inert. The
soporific words of the allied propaganda machinery, with their
insistence on fascist filthiness, are paralysed in the throat. Here are
purists ; clean and dutiful men, and yet we would be more fastidious
than they were?




196 The thirst for annihilation


That there is nothing to insulate us from falling prey to such
things - that the slime and ash in a drainage ditch outside
Birkenau might be the residue of our own flesh — is a savagery of
chance in which it is necessary to exult if we are to connect. A wall
that stood between us and such acute horror would still be a wall,
and if a God had existed to prevent the annihilation of Hitler’s
victims life as a whole would be the camp (for the Nazi it is). Pain,
degradation, and death are one thing, the enslavement of desire
something else. It is only because our bodies are weak and die that
it is impossible for there to be a perfect cage, or for the sun to be
locked interminably in a fascist health. To be protected by
something more than zero is the final term of imprisonment.

*

There is poetry after Auschwitz, just as there was poetry within it,
and only because there was. There is poetry wherever there are
droplets of the sun who are not afraid to touch (however
imperilled). I imagine there was even laughter amongst the
doomed. There have been shadow-spaces of the Earth such as are
impossible to think, but ‘[w]hat does truth signify ... if we do not
think what exceeds the possibility of thought . . .?’ [Ill 12]. It is
only at the edge of the impossible that the wretchedness of isolated
being is grated open, and ‘poetry is the impossible’ [III 520],

It is not out of innocence, but from out of a history pock-marked
by exterminations, that Bataille writes: ‘I would like to efface the
trace of my steps . . .’ [Ill 161].

I efface
the step
i efface
the word
space

and breath

are lacking [IV 28],

The alcohol
Of poetry
Is silence

Unmade [of a corpse] [III 372].

*


Fascism is not so much a symptom of political desperation, as of




Inconclusive communication 197


libidino-religious numbness, a kind of anti-poetry on the streets.
Like all policy-obsessed behaviour patterns it is rooted in the
humanist dead-end characterized by hysterical struggle for auto-
nomy: self-determination, national self-management, master-races,
autarky ... all attempts to seal the blister from within, to hide
from the ocean. The thought that there might be a political
response to fascism makes me laugh. Shall we set our little fascism
against their big one? Organize ourselves, become disciplined,
maybe we could make ourselves some smart uniforms and stomp
about in the street? Politics is the last great sentimental indulgence
of mankind, and it has never achieved anything except a deepened
idiocy, more work, more repression, more pompous ass-holes
demanding obedience. Quite naturally we are bored of it to the
point of acute sickness. I have no interest at all in groping at power
in the blister. What matters is burning a hole through the wall.

Bataille was not immune to the political charade, but even his
short period of reality-process politicking during 1935-6 - when he
was deeply involved with the journal Contre-Attaque and its project
of radicalizing the Popular Front - is mapped in the labyrinth. The
Contre-Attaque mobilization into militant action against fascism,
militarism, and capitalism, the ‘Popular Front in the Street’ [I
402], stumbles in a maze of composition and decomposition. War
with Germany is a futility because ‘[t]he process of decomposition
which has been slow during the course of the last war will begin in
France from the beginning of the next’ [I 330], In his 1933 essay
on The Psychological Structure of Fascism Bataille outlines a re-
emergent theological impulse in which the heterogeneous or
decompositional element is deployed paradoxically as an operator
of social integration, tending to the fascist state as a secularized
divine order. The quasi-fascist undertow of his own politicized
work - which he laments in a text from 1958 - has less to do with
the exultation of violence, than with its concession to counter-
discipline:

What decides social destiny today is the organic creation of a
vast composition of forces, disciplined, fanatical, capable of
exercising an implacable authority in the day to come. Such a
composition of forces must group together all those who do not
accept the course to the abyss - to ruin and to war - of a
capitalist society without head and without eyes ... [I 380].

Capital is a headless lurch into the abyss, an acephalic catastrophe.




198 The thirst for annihilation


What Bataille recoils from at this moment is not the claustrophobic
managerial profanity of capital, but its psychotic flow into ruin:

We see that the masses of humanity remain at the disposal of
blind forces which dedicate them to inexplicable hecatombs . . .
[I 402],

The vocabulary of such writings does not jar against the deep
currents of his slide into the sacred, but its evaluative impulse is
almost wholly reactive; a tawdry Leninist voluntarism fixated upon
control. I think of these 1930s texts as parodic, they are humorous
and lively, a definite advance upon the austere preachings so
prevalent on the left. They are, in any case, at best a joke. Who
is more attentive than Bataille to the vacuity of manifestos,
programmes, policy statements, declarations of commitment?

The destruction of language is not my act [fait ] but does not
have a place in me except by destroying me, like the act of the
moment which has suppressed me (I speak now but in vain) [IV
167],

‘The impossible is the basis of being’ [III 41]. To write is poverty
and captivity if it is not wreckage upon the impossible, because the
impossible is not a margin, a fissure, a border-zone, but an
immensity compared to which the possible shrivels to the edge of
nothing. ‘I even believe that in a sense my stories clearly attain the
impossible ’ [III 101], and that is why they matter, why The Blue of
Noon is of immeasurably greater importance than the Contre-Attaque
posturings, why in contrast to Sade - who sought ‘an impossible
freedom’ [IX 242] - Lenin is a ranting dwarf. ‘ - IMPOSSIBLE!
she cried’ [IV 51], ‘read or work? it was impossible’ [IV 59]. The
Hatred for Poetry, renamed The Impossible, exempts Baudelaire and
Rimbaud from the complacency of words that resign themselves to
the cramped box of the possible. Insipid lyricism vaunts itself as
another possible type of language, a type that is elevated, beautiful,
ethereal. ‘True poetry is outside laws. But poetry, in the end,
accepts poetry’ [III 218], Bataille vomits, but the ‘poetry of
Baudelaire - or that of Rimbaud - never inspires that hatred in
me’ [III 513], and from the start Bataille’s reading of Nietzsche
insists that - unlike the language of fascism — Nietzsche’s texts are
labyrinths, with no hint of the directive, no politics [I 450-2], only
the voyage into the impossible, the will to chance. Utter confusion.
‘Those moments, he said, where everything is divine, because




Inconclusive communication 199


everything is impossible. (Impossible above all to explain, to speak)'
[IV 146]. Only when human relationships collapse in darkness and
pain is there worth. ‘Between her and me there was never anything
possible’ [IV 233].

At first, death surrounds us with an endless silence as an island
is surrounded by water. But there, precisely, is the unsayable.
What importance have words which do not pierce this silence[?]
What importance in speaking of ‘moment of the tomb’ [ moment de
tombe], when each word is nothing fcr as long as it has not
attained the beyond of words[?] [IV 166].

*

Death is the reality of the impossible, making fictions of us all, and
it is only in fiction that we separate ourselves from it. Wandering in
the labyrinth one finds that not-one is only distanced by a
complication of terrain, and that passages leading out of the
possible can never be walled-off. If reasons were needed why
literature cannot be supplanted by philosophy this is one, even
though it is unreason itself. ‘Are we able to imagine a place more
favourable to this disorder: the lost depths of the cavern . . .’ [X
597], depths that yawn as ‘. . . the abyss opened in us by eroticism
and death’ [X 596], Depths that are also the maze, the pit, the
caverns of Lascaux: ‘it is in the bottom of a. fissure, so difficult of
access that it is today called the “pits”, that we find ourselves
before the most striking, and the most strange of evocations’ [X
597], The shamanistic figures marking the walls of Lascaux are not
to be outgrown or sublated. No residence that is not founded upon
the labyrinth: ‘pass the night in the house if you dare, but don’t
forget that death inhabits it . . .’ [IV 123]. Not that on the outside
of the house, the box, the cage, there is anywhere to hide from the
desolation of zero since ‘the thunder of death/fills the universe’ [III
212] and one can only run into her arms (‘death my lover’ [IV 22],
Bataille cries). On the other side of the line is evidenced the idiocy
that was one’s flight:

Black death you are my bread
I eat you in my heart
terror is my sweetness
madness is in my hand [III 88].

Stories celebrate life, poetry exults in death. Wherever a story



200 The thirst for annihilation


disintegrates into pain and confusion poetry begins, and whatever
stinks of imperfection crawling crippled out of a howl is a poem.
Bataille credits Blake with the succinct religious acceptance that
‘everything that is sacred is poetic, and everything that is poetic is
sacred ’ [IX 226],

I speak amongst the dead

and the dead are dumb [IV 19].

*

Those who consider reality to be a text can be said to be ‘writers’
only in a problematic — if not parodic — sense. Not for them the
tormenting discontinuity between those tides of excitation we call
‘thought’ or ‘moods’ and their transcription into a linear series of
collectively estimated marks. The ‘general text’ of which they
dream is the stage for a comedy of writing; an equilibriated space
where every frustration is immediately soliloquy, where affect is
trimmed to the measure of its pronouncement, where the ghoul of
mute horror - the terribly inert compulsion to write that breaks its
victims beneath leaden feet — appears in the mask of a malleable
clown.

‘Malaise, silence’ [IV 134], That the inability to write should
itself become utterance, and thus text: this most nocturnal of
thoughts is the restless spectre that the writer can neither still, nor
embrace. The sensation evoked by its visitation is the same as the
one that afflicts the victim of a hopelessly profound dream,
consummated in a phrase which - remembered during the hours of
waking — is degraded into an inanity. The withered remains of
those chill and expansive impossibilities, the mysterious com-
panions of darkness, silence, and solitude, are rediscovered after an
interval of sleep; wrought into facile puzzles, and even - after
daylight has sucked away the last shadows - into mere paradoxes.

To become degraded to the level of a writer is to be perpetually
captivated, and then betrayed, by the figments of method, a
resource for creation, an inevitability. As poetry is to prose, so
would this be, in turn, to poetry itself: a summit from which the
flood-plains of textuality could be perpetually re-inundated, a
hieroglyph of utter fertility. But the word ‘method’ is rather too
philosophical, for what is at issue here is a map for traversing
unknown terrains, and not one for domesticating them; a chart for
discoveries that accentuate the enigma of the world. ‘Method’ not




Inconclusive communication 201


as lucid preparation, but as a passage to the point of delirium, to
the point of an unconsciousness through excess. Method as a map
that is indistinguishable from the voyage, a track, traced out in
figures that already attest to the exoticism it announces, and
leading towards what is ferociously up-stream. What is craved
throughout the long nights of entrancement is that one be
obliterated at the source of the deluge. ‘To be spared a prosaic
death!’ But where the foaming torrents should be found ... is dust,
and even worse than this: the powdered remains of ancient sea-
shells. Relics of the same ‘movement which denudes necessarily and
makes one enter naked into a desert’ [II 242]. Those who sink to
their knees in despair, after clawing their way to such places in a
fever of excitement, are at least granted visions of a divine cruelty;
of a laughter more acute than any to be found upon the flat-lands
of the earth.

you are the void and the cinder

bird without head with wings beating the night

the universe is made of your slight hope

the universe is your sick heart and mine
beating to skim death
to the cemetery of hope

my pain is joy

and the cinder is fire [III 87],

When compared to the dark heart of writing, despair is almost a
temptation. Yet, despite the black farce of wreckage that a fate
crippled by writing effects of itself, there is something about such a
fate that remains unbroken, or at least, something that outlasts
every vestige of the individual it condemns. Rimbaud spent a
decade trying to dissolve it in the Ethiopian sun, but he still died as
a poet who had long been silent, rather than as someone who had
salvaged their humanity from the insanity of words.

*

The greatness of Rimbaud is to have led poetry to the failure of
poetry [III 533].

*

In a letter dated the 13th May 1871 Rimbaud writes to Georges




202 The thirst for annihilation


Izambard from the maze of poetic delirium and the loss of self-
possession. In a play upon the classic formula of Cartesian
subjectivism, poetry is depicted as a shattering derangement of
vision and a dislocation of the ego:

Now I degrade myself as far as possible. Why? I want to be a
poet, and I am working to render myself visionary, you will not
understand any of this, and I scarcely know how to explain it to
you. It is necessary to arrive at the unknown by a deregulation of
all the senses. The sufferings are enormous, but one must be
strong, to be born a poet, and I recognize myself as a poet. This
is not at all my fault. It is false to say: I think. One should say:
one thinks me. . . I is an other [R 5-7],

As if the confusional cyclone of poetry had already laid waste the
resources of articulation, Rimbaud says that he cannot explain
himself, just as two years later in A Season in Hell he will write: ‘I
understand, and not knowing how to explain myself without pagan
words, I would rather be silent’ [R 304], This is not to say that
words come to an end, but only that discourse ceases to dominate
them. The motor is not discursive competence, but the vacant eye
of the storm. In a further letter, this time to Paul Demeny, dated
the 15th of the same month, Rimbaud repeated the phrase ‘a
deregulation of all the senses' [R 10] (only the emphasis is changed),
the phrase 1 am an other, and the rhetoric of the po'ete maudit from the
Izambard letter, stressing the necessity of intoxication, suffering,
and exile:

The poet makes himself a visionary by a long, immense and
rational deregulation of all the senses. All forms of love, of
suffering, of madness: he searches himself, he exhausts all
poisons in himself, in order to preserve only their quintessences.
Unspeakable torture where he has need of all faith, all super-
human strength, where he becomes among everyone the great
invalid, the great criminal, the great accursed one — and the
supreme scholar! - Because he arrives at the unknown, since he
has cultivated his soul, already rich, more than anybody! He
arrives at the unknown, and when, bewildered, he ends by losing
the intelligence of his visions, he has seen them! Let him die as
he leaps through unheard of and unnamable things: other
horrible workers will come; they will begin from the horizons
where the other collapsed! [R 7-17].




Inconclusive communication 203


A method or an antimethod, the will to chance, a voyage into loss
of control, this impossibility is the desolate core of poetry, a space
of slippage. To slip is not to plan, to work, to struggle. ‘I have a
horror of all trades. Masters and workers, all peasants, ignoble.
The hand at the quill just as the hand at the plough’ [R 301].
Rimbaud confesses that he is ‘lazier than a toad’ [R 301-2],
without decency, an alien to the civilization of toil. ‘I have never
been of this people; I have never been a Christian; I am of the race
who sings under torture; I do not understand the laws, I am a
beast: you fool yourselves . . .’ [R 308]. An explorer of the sacred,
traversing wildernesses beyond piety or sense, charred by the flame
of the impossible, Rimbaud treads the edge of the maze, scraping
away his tight European skin.

*

I am of an inferior race to all eternity [R 304],

Religion.

*

The mobility peculiar to the labyrinth - real cosmic motion or
liquidation - is not confined by the scales, instead it finds a shaft of
facilitation passing from one to another, a ‘slippage’ (glissement ) , the
full consequence of which is an illimitable dispersion across the
strata: communication through death. A strangely stationary
mobility therefore. It is not that journeys are lacking in Bataille’s
writings, merely that they radiate from a transition in profundity,
from which they derive their futility and abortiveness. These static
voyages can be undertaken by invalids in bed; Tropmann in the
last two sections of ‘Maternal Feet’ in The Blue of Noon [III
425-39], Henri in Julie [IV 57-1 14]. ‘The Wait’ in The Abbe C. [Ill
316-19] describes Charles and fiponine in bed, glued together by
the horror of Charles’ apparently impending murder at the hands
of the ‘giant of butchery’ (another Henri) who fiponine counts
amongst her lovers. The narrator of the first part of The Impossible
declares himself: ‘prey to fear in my bed’ [III 113].

Meanderings in extension remain trapped in the maze, unless
they cross over into a ‘blind slippage into death’ [III 29], ‘this
slippage outside oneself that necessarily produces itself when death
comes into play’ [II 246]. A ‘slippage produces itself [V 1 13], we
do not do so, a chasm opens, chaos (=0), something horrific in its




204 The thirst for annihilation


depth, a season in Hell that ‘slips immensely into the impossible’
[III 77], ‘the intensity and intimacy of a sensation opened itself
onto an abyss where there is nothing which is not lost, just as a
profound wound opens itself to death’ [IV 248]. Poetry is this
slippage that is broken upon the end of poetry, erased in a desert as
‘beautiful as death’ [IV 18]. There is no quesion of affirmation,
achievement, gain, but only a catastrophe without mitigation
compared to which everything is poverty and imprisonment. ‘I
would love to forget the ungraspable slippage of myself into
corruption’ [III 227], ‘Corruption is the spiritual cancer that
reigns in the depths of things’ [IV 261],

my heart is black ink

my sex is a dead sun [III 87].

Life decomposes into filth as it explores the vicarious death of the
universe. In no case does the heterogeneous belong to any scale,
since it is ‘exactly’ the irruption of decomposability. Heterogeneous
(base) matter - ‘blood, sperm, urine and vomit . . .’ [I 24] — is
characterized negatively in relation to every possible stratum of
elemental organization, which is why it resists the discourse on
things. Vomit, excrement, and decomposing flesh do not proffer
unproblematic solidity or comprehensible form, but rather quasi-
fluid divisibility, imprecise consistency, multiple, insufficient, and
evanescent patterns of cohesion. All of which are mixed with words
slimed with sanctity. ‘To write is to investigate chance’ [VI 69],
but the explosive excess that breaks in a black foam of poetry is not
merely a risk, because risk implies the possibility of a benign
outcome. It is a ‘ruin without limits’ [III 75], ‘the submission of
man to [blank]’ [II 247]. Excess is venom.

*


Winter wind

oh my dying sister

wolf gleam bite of hunger

stone of frost pasted on a naked heart

oh spittle of indifference

oh heaven of insult against all hearts

oh cold emptier than death [IV 26].




Inconclusive communication 205


Particles decay, molecules disintegrate, cells die, organisms perish,
species become extinct, planets are destroyed and stars burn-out,
galaxies explode . . . until the unfathomable thirst of the entire
universe collapses into darkness and ruin. Death, glorious and
harsh, sprawls vast beyond all suns, sheltered by the sharp flicker-
lip of flame and silence, cold mother of all gods, hers is the deep
surrender. If we are to resent nothing - not even nothing - it is
necessary that all resistance to death cease. We are made sick by
our avidity to survive, and in our sickness is the thread that leads
back and nowhere, because we belong to the end of the universe.
The convulsion of dying stars is our syphilitic inheritance. The
name ‘Bataille’ loosely congeals a message from the dead heart of
the real, and anything human is quite incidental here. Matter
signals to its lost voyagers, telling them that their quest is vain, and
that their homeland already lies in ashes behind them.

If there is a conclusion it is zero. Silence. Words continue as
something else, as something in any case, or at most; the edge of
something (of all things). Yet there is nothing but chaos, even if
chaos (alone) is the repressed. Unilateral difference. That is why a
revolution must be a zenith of competence nucleated upon burning
insanity, since anarchy and utter surrender only connect in a
religion of death. Thanocracy, anarchy are undifferentiable at zero,
and a human being without desperation escapes my comprehen-
sion. Being created in the image of God, we mean nothing to
ourselves, and want only the inhuman. They are right to say that
in trafficking these words I correspond to a zone of Nietzsche’s
maximum detestation; vermin, disease, madness, anarchy, and
religion flow through me as through their own space.

Through Bataille also.

*

Here in the loft space of the inner edge there is no end for words
they meander through the cluttered strip
these mutant insects violently blinded and driven on
by motors humming in darkness

once maggots heaving themselves from the carcass of reason
now winged
fat with venom
they rave for me.




206 The thirst for annihilation


Like Bataille, I too ‘crawl in order no longer to be’ [III 91]. It is
possible that others have clawed their way to deeper abjections
than I have known, but there is no reason for me to believe it.
Beyond the end of succumbing is a subsidence through the very
basement of the Earth, leaving a splinter of death clinging to its
unravelling ghost, naked and serene in Hell.

Death is no longer a speculative problem for me, but a memory
belonging to something else, a vestige upon zero. I can only ask
myself: did Bataille also cross the line and die before the end? Crouching
deeply broken in this life, which has become the vestibule of an
unbearable but delicious horror, I supplicate myself to nothing,
and offer up the sacrifice of these words to death.

Europe is the racial trash-can of Asia, and Britain skims-off
Europe’s charred froth. My ancestors were vagrants, whores, and
killers. Minds melted by toadstools, they exulted in the ashes of
monasteries, the base-line of the human animal, slimed across the
sea-rocks of the North. ‘It is quite evident to me that I have always
been of an inferior race. I am not able to comprehend revolt. My
race does not ever stir itself except for pillage: like wolves at the
beast they have not killed’ [R 302], With so much ash in the blood,
I never had a chance of peace ... so many years gnawing and
scratching at the metal bars until I collapsed with exhaustion and
disgust. Its hard to understand those graceful creatures who seem
to have escaped from being knifed into inarticulate wreckage by
life. Dissatisfaction white-extreme as a heated blade twisted into
blank vulnerabilities cross-cut with ink droolings and clotting pain
into absurdity. I have long understood the necessity of counting
myself amongst the accursed, even before crossing over the line.

I see now that my terrestrial ur-mother was ravished by
something fanged and insane from the wilderness, and that I am a
vampire veiled raggedly in humanity, corrupted from birth by an
unholy intimacy with death. The fever that bears me overstretches
the entire health of the Earth, carrying me with my accursed twin
into an emptiness beyond the reservoir of stars. Although the
adventure of inexistence only begins in Hell there is no fear, only
awe and burning werewolf thirst for the voyage. Nestled in some
cove of this ulterior shore an utterly consummate eroticism - a pact
against nature - tenses through fusion to its evaporation, denuded
before the abyss; a glistening droplet of loss and beginning.

What could be more pitiful than the romantics with their sobs of
aspiration? The toxic fruitage of eroticism is crisper, more silent,




Inconclusive communication 207


than the emptiest night. Inside the perimeter of Hell no walls
remain against the unfathomable. Everything is calm, luxuriant,
incomprehensibly desolate. The ghost of self drifts in the shallows;
the fading echo from a clamour of frantic dreams. One swims
effortlessly into not-one. Down beyond the mouth of the estuary the
ocean awaits . . .

*

To an angel of death I wrote:

How I remember the way it was, with you sheltering in a cluster of

fictions, eyes implacable and drenched in extinction, lost in the

alternative night that waits

Patient immense

Out beyond the river-mouth

The cavity in which we float

Unsettled in our sleep

Anticipative

Nothing could be more diseased
And yet on the other side of the line
We shall bask in ecstasy
Until we burn

Oh yes, there are more and more words. My fever is fertilized by
Hell itself. Even in the tower of reason they flap after you,
abominable things released from dead suns. Out there in the
underworld we await ourselves. Agonies of patience drown us in
silence. Scorched. Transfigured.

Infernal genius chars the roots of our minds.

Now we are trapped on the inside of the world
but our strange aching chokes the crypt we haunt
maddens us
drives us out . . .

dragged for so many years
through the confines of heaven
flanked by statues of the patriarchs
until arriving in a place
lacerated by the sun

to drink the tincture of my father’s crumbled skull
ashes of monks their screams calcified
mixed with the venom of a spider
long extinct




208 The thirst for annihilation


There shall be new and terrible monsters.

We arrive at the city of God from somewhere they don’t
understand and torch it to the ground

dripping flame from the infernal bake-chambers of our minds

death is no stranger to us

behind our eyes lies a space beyond the stars

there is no doubt we are an abomination to this world . . .

I write now in the attic of insanity, smeared across words by

unimagined desperations of beatitude. These soft terrestrial nights

are unable to soothe the Hellish embers which blaze in my

delirium. Horror and obsession scrawl their leprosy across my skin.

My delight is unfathomable in its harshness. Shadow embalms me.

a lock of death explores your ear

and each word you write

unpicks the stitches of the world

until i feel as if i have passed through the wall

so that everything becomes perfect

and ill

The illness guides my words:

sickness and death my sweet schizophrenic mother
your child is lost to you
and found on the other side
where you inexist

Ah! Such abysses of disease open before me. I decay, transfixed
upon abolition.

Ardent for collapse, I explore the rotting cities of the inner edge.
The stink of opium interweaves with that of bat-dung and fungus.
The moon mutters its electric paean to ruin, and I gaze into the
grave of my life which gapes its moist idiocy. This is the labyrinth
that leads out of the world.

In this place - luxuriant with deterioration - even your torturer’s
silence is an ecstasy

i see you hushed by the sacred

something feral treads the undertow of my thoughts

as a wolf prowls the snow desolation

famished for your words

so that it seems as nothing but bone

strung with death

and clutched




Inconclusive communication 209


by blackened nerves
untangled and strewn
through the mad howls of zero

Things drift to pieces, but I am so tense and thirsty for it.

I lurk in the wastes of the interior, intoxicated by the murmur of
convulsions to come. We are specks of death entangled in wolf
threads and ravings.

Only fictions separate us.

Bonded on the far side of blood, we are wedded beyond sense in
Hell.


*


lets slip out
into the night

claw free of our souls and follow the road
through the heart of fear
where the spawn of vivisections
scramble from the blinding-machine
to tread the shadow lip of sanity

*

where the far side of the line transects the darkness in your mind

i want to navigate deserts of pain

whilst the galaxies decay

come unstrung in the night

headless ravens beat spasms of paralysed flight

*

Humanism (capitalist patriarchy) is the same thing as our
imprisonment. Trapped in the maze, treading the same weary
round. Round and round in the garbage. Round and round and
round and round and round and round and round and round and
round and round and round and round and round and round and
round (God is a scratched record), even when we think we are
progressing, knowing more. Round and round, missing the sacred,
until it drives you completely into your mind. But at least we die.

Personalism is a trap because to believe that some of what one
was holding onto will be taken care of by another being is
irreligion. It is not our devotion that matters, but surrender. There
is no end to the loss that lies down river. If only we can give up.




210 The thirst for annihilation


‘Life will dissolve itself in death, rivers in the sea, and the known in
the unknown’ [V 1 19].

What could be more theological than politics, with its inter-
minable idiot interrogation: who has the power? Revolution is
different. Monotheism cannot be reformed, and must be washed
away, but it is also the horizon of sanity. Abandonment.

Yes, I indulge myself intolerably, although 7 is also Bataille’s je,
because it is not his, or anyone’s. ‘I am all the names in history’ [N
III 1351], but that is scarcely to begin.

Each day that I remain trapped in the garbage I forget a little
more of what it is to cross the line, but even forgetting is dying, and
dying is crossing the line. Death is truth because error cannot
adhere to it, all dreams are soluble within it, but death is not the
word ‘death’, or any other word. The zero of words is not the word
‘zero’, nor are words about words.

*

a face looms from charred shadow
violently pale the night has silently
desolated an eye
blood flows thick
and profuse

it is only with great tentativeness that my finger
strays

into the vacant socket

searching out frayed nerve nakedness

for it must be a focus of jagged agony

condensed in the darkness

and there will be no speech

*


to sleep hanging upside down
in a barn

sheltered from the day
and then when it gets dark
flapping out




Notes


1 The reference is to Kant’s First Critique [K IV 400 — 1 ] .

2 The Kant /Capital complex is outlined in accordance with a Hegelian
sanity in J.M. Bernstein’s The Philosophy of the Novel: Lukacs, Marxism and
the Dialectics of Form and Gillian Rose’s Hegel Contra Sociology, both of
whom have a dependence upon the work of Lukacs, especially his
section on ‘Die Antinomien des burgerlichen Denkens in Geschichte
und KlassenbewuBtsein’ [L II 287-330]. A schizoanalysis of the same
complex is explored in Deleuze and Guattari’s Antioedipus. Neo-
Schellingian readings are most meticulously developed in Heidegger’s
exploration of technology, most particularly in his ‘Die Frage nach der
Technik’, in Vortrage und Aufsatge.

3 This argument is to be found outlined in the twelfth section of Mille
Plateaux, entitled ‘Traite de nomadologie: la machine de guerre’.

4 I have no argument at all with Derrida as a reader of Heidegger, after
all, deconstruction and reading Heidegger is one thing. It is when his
academic textualism attempts to cope with writers such as Nietzsche,
Freud, Bataille, and Artaud that it definitively abandons its zone of
relative utility and becomes an apparatus of domestication in the
service of the state. His reading of Bataille is most carefully developed
in ‘De l’economie restreinte a l’economie general: Un hegelianisme sans
reserve’ in L’ecriture el la difference. A gesture towards Bataille is also
evident in the essay ‘Differance’ in Marges, and no doubt elsewhere.
Anyone seeking to fortify a reconstructed reason against the sacred will
find much of value in these writings.

5 Thermodynamics is associated above all with a statistical revolution in
the natural sciences. In the third volume of his Hermes Michel Serres
deftly marks the importance of thermodynamics in the words ‘the
philosophy of physics is the theory of information’ [p.44], since with
the introduction of probabilistic description the form and content of
natural science become indilferentiable in principle. The importance of
Serres’ work in this field is immense, and his writing is consistently
beautiful.

Since information is a continuous rather than a discrete variable, the
results generated by informational research are of a quantitative
character. These quantitities are expressed as negative entropies, or




212 The thirst for annihilation


negentropies. The concept of entropy, stemming from the work of
Clausius, and building on Carnot’s theory of thermic motors, is given
its modern determination in Boltzmann’s equation S = K log W, where
S is entropy, expressed in terms of the ratio of energy to heat, derived
from Boltzmann’s constant K (ergs/degrees). W is the thermic
probability, or totality of possible permutations. Logarithms are used
in order that the addition of permutational states is equivalent 'to an
exponentiation of improbability. This is easily understood in terms of
the information concept, where, for instance, 2 bits added to 2 bits
gives 4 bits, and this is equivalent to a fourfold increase in the precision
of the message.

The theory of information stems from an article by Shannon and
Weaver entitled ‘The mathematical theory of communication’. The
thermodynamic concept of entropy is adopted by information theory to
describe ‘informational uncertainty’ or ‘potential information’. This is
the set of possible signals from which a specific signal is selected. As a
measure of potential information, Lila Gatlin, in her book Information
Theory and the Living System (the crispest and most incisive text I have
found on the subject), equates the maximum entropy of a signal with
the logarithm of the number of elements in the alphabet of signals, a
figure she denotes by the letter ‘a’. Boltzmann’s K log W is thus
simplified to log a. If base 2 logarithms are used the units of
information are bits. The level of information of a given signal is equal
to the entropy of the system. For instance, in a system with four
elements, such as a genetic code, any one of four possible signals or
events is hypothetically possible at any given position in the message
sequence, so that in a state of maximum uncertainty each signal would
have an information value of log 4, which is equal to 2 bits.

Gatlin writes, ‘Thus with the higher entropy of potential information
we associate the concepts of potential message variety, large vocabulary,
surprisal value, and unexpectedness’ [p. 49], Potential information
increases as entropy approaches its maximum value, or log a. Negative
entropy, or negentropy, on the other hand, is equivalent to stored
information, or information density. This is a measure of the order of a
system. If stored information is expressed as a proportion of potential
information it is called redundancy. ‘If there were no constraints and
every possible letter combination occurred with equal frequency,
potential message variety would be maximal; but there would be no
way to detect error because error detection and correction are based on
forbidden and restricted combinations’ [p. 50], Effective communica-
tion, and indeed, the effective transmission of energy within any system
of control, requires a balance between raw information or disorder, and
stability or order: ‘the capacity to convey meaning through language
depends not on an entropy maximum or minimum but rather on a
delicate optimization of the two opposing elements of variety and
reliability’ [p. 51].

Two highly authoritative texts on the subject are Carnap’s Two
Essays on Entropy (London 1977) and Kullback’s Information Theory and




Notes 213


Statistics (New York 1968), although I find both works perfectly
incomprehensible.

6 E. Zermelo’s Wiederkehreinwand is an argument from the repetition of
H-value transformations over long periods, based on a formula by
Poincare, suggesting that directional H-value tendencies are inconsis-
tent with particle mechanics. Ehrenfest in his The Conceptual Foundations
of the Statistical Approach in Mechanics argues that this objection is
dependent upon a formulation of thermodynamic processes in terms of
particle impacts (the Stosszahlansatz ) that Boltzmann abandons
[pp. 15-56].

7 Boltzmann discusses Poincare’s equation in some detail [B III 587],
describing its essential commitment as being to ‘[t]the univocity and
reversibility of the integral of mechanical differential equations’ [B III
587]. See previous note.

8 This difference is most overt in the ‘Project for a scientific psychology’
(which is not contained in the German edition I cite, but in the Standard
Edition SE I 283). Freud discusses its prevalence in his work in an
important note in the ‘Traumdeutung’ [F II 516n].

9 Bataille’s solar economics is frequently accused of naturalism by the
humanist left. Such resistance to naturalization is a Kantian insistence,
simultaneous with transcendental philosophy as such (and not in any
sense a specifically post-bourgeois subversion of modern culture as so
much recent ‘theory’ would suggest). An antinaturalist approach to the
object is the initiating gesture of Kantianism. If ‘ideology’ is to be used
as a name for the rationality of capital (a pretentiously gesticulating
move), it is anti-naturalism, rather than naturalization, which is the
pre-eminent trait of this ideology. This is not to suggest that the de-
naturalization of the real is inevitably without ‘progressive’ features. If
undertaken carefully - without mytho-theological relapse - anti-
naturalism is certainly able to assist new money (interests) against old,
intervening effectively in disputes between liberals and conservatives,
although it seems that a great deal more than this is often being
claimed.

What the bourgeois intellect forbade was always something quite
different, namely, the thought of natural de-naturalization, or the
acknowledgement of libidinal escalation. This is why Barthes is
inscribed within the horizon of critique - as its legitimate semiological
discipline - in a way that Nietzsche is not.

10 In my somewhat limited researches I found far less on the history of
mathematical zero than I had anticipated. For my purposes the
importance of its insistent invocation lies in its origin in a non-
monotheistic culture (India), its character of indivisibility without
unity, its volatilization of technocratic rationalism, and its perfect co-
existence with death. Zero (derived, like ‘cipher’, from the Arabic
‘zephirum’) is the non-speculative other of unity, bringing it into
affinity with a question of the feminine such as that emerging from the
writings of Luce Irigaray, especially Speculum: de Tautre femme and Ce
sexe qui n’en est pas un. Both of these texts launch a devastating assault




214 The thirst for annihilation


on the notions of unity, solidity, and identity, associated with the
Judaeo-Hellenic privilege of One.

1 1 More technical information on cyclones can be found in E. Palmen
and C.W. Newton’s Atmospheric Circulation Systems: Their Structure and
Physical Interpretation ; see also John G. Lockwood’s World Climatology: An
Environmental Approach.

12 Wittfogel marks out the interdependency of political power and
hydraulic control in his study of Oriental Despotism.




Bibliography


In writing this book I have read almost nothing except for Bataille’s
Oeuvres Completes, supplemented only by those writers with whom I have
had some previous intimacy, most important of whom are Kant and
Nietzsche, but including also Sade, Freud, Marx, Boltzmann, Rimbaud,
Miller, and a few others, amongst whom are such enemies as Aquinas,
Hegel, and Derrida. More important by far than most of these names have
been the saints, shamans, werewolves, vampires, and lunatics with whom I
have communed, and whose names are absent from this text, even though
their words have infested my own beyond extrication. It would be
impolitic to make a selection - although I could easily do so - but sooner
or later you will hear of them all from elsewhere. It is not necessarily any
credit upon a writer for them to appear on the list that follows, crass
cultural exigencies alone necessitate it.


COLLECTED EDITIONS

Aquinas, Thomas, Summa Theologiae, Translation, Introduction, Notes,
Appendices, and Glossary by Thomas Gilbey Order of Preachers,
London.

Bataille, Georges, Oeuvres Completes, editors I & II Denis Hollier, III & IV
Thadee Klossowski, V Mme Leduc, VI (and following volumes - 12
vols in all) Henri Ronse, and J.-M. Rey, Paris.

Boltzmann, Ludwig von, Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, published by Dr
Fritz Hasenohrl, Leipzig 1909.

Descartes, Rene, Oeuvres, editors M. Darboux and M. Boutroux, Paris.

Freud, Sigmund, Studien Ausgabe, editors Alexander Mitscherlich, Angela
Richards, James Strachey, and Ilse Grubrich-Simitis, Frankfurt am
Main.

Hegel, G.W.F., Theorie Werkausgabe, based on Werke of 1832-45, editors Eva
Moldenhauer and Markus Michel, Frankfurt am Main.

Heidegger, Martin, Gesamtausgabe, multiple editors, Frankfurt am Main
(still incomplete, hence entry below).

Kant, Immanuel, Werkausgabe, editor Wilhelm Weischedel, Frankfurt am
Main.




216 The thirst for annihilation


Lukacs, Georg, Werke, editor Frank Benseler, Berlin.

Nietzsche, Friedrich W., Werke, editor Karl Schlechta, Frankfurt am Main.

Sade, Marquis de, Oeuvres Completes du Marquis de Sade, Edition Definitive,
Paris 1966-7.

Schopenhauer, Arthur, Ziircher Ausgabe: Werke in zehn Bdnden, text follows
historical-critical edition by Arthur Hiibscher, editorial materials
acquired by Angelika Hiibscher, editors Claudia Schmolders, Fritz
Senn, and Gerd Haffmans, Zurich.


MONOGRAPHS

Aristotle, Politics, London 1959.

Augustine, The City of God, Harmondsworth 1984.

Bernstein, J.M., The Philosophy of the Novel: Lukacs, Marxism and the Dialectics
of Form, Brighton 1984.

Carnap, Rudolf, Two Essays on Entropy, London 1977.

Celine, Louis-Ferdinand, Voyage au Bout de la Nuit, Paris 1952.

Cioran, E.M., La Tentation d’Exister, Paris 1956.

Deleuze, Gilles, Difference et Repetition, Paris 1969.

Nietzsche et la Philosophie, Paris 1962.

Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix, Capitalisme et Schizophrenic l: I’Anti-
oedipe, Paris 1972.

Capitalisme et Schizophrenie 11: Mille Plateaux, Paris 1980.

Derrida, Jacques, L’t,crilure et la Difference, Paris 1967.

Marges: de la Philosophie, Paris 1972.

Spurs: Neitzsche’s Styles (Eperons: les Styles de Nietzsche), London 1978.

Ehrenfest, Paul and Tatiana, The Conceptual Foundations of the Statistical
Approach in Mechanics, New York 1959.

Gatlin, Lila L., Information Theory and the Living System, London 1972.
Gleick, James, Chaos, London 1985.

Hayman, Ronald, De Sade: a Critical Biography, London 1978.

Heidegger, Vorlrage und Aufsatze, Pfullingen 1959.

Hobbes, Thomas, Leviathan, Harmondsworth 1988.

Irigaray, Luce, Speculum: de I’Autre Femme, Paris 1974.

Ce Sexe qui n’en est pas Un, Paris 1977.

Klossowski, Pierre, Nietzsche et le Cercle Vicieux, Paris 1969.

Kullback, Solomon, Information Theory and Statistics, New York 1968.
Lockwood, John G., World Climatology: an Environmental Approach, London
1974.

Lyotard, Jean-Fran^ois, Economic Libidinale, Paris 1974.

Marx, Karl, Capital Volume One, London 1977.

Grundrisse, Harmondsworth 1973.

Miller, Henry, The Tropic of Cancer, London 1965.

Palmen, E. and Newton, C.W., Atmospheric Circulation Systems: their Structure
and Physical Interpretation, London 1969.

Plato, Collected Dialogues, Princeton 1982.

Ragon, Michel, The Space of Death, translated by Alan Sheridan,
Charlottesville 1983.



Notes 217


Rimbaud, Arthur, Collected Poems, with introduction and prose translation
by Oliver Bernard, Harmondsworth 1986.

Rose, Gillian, Hegel Contra Sociology, London 1981.

Serres, Michel, Hermes III: la Traduction, Paris 1974.

Shannon, Claude E. and Weaver, Warren, The Mathematical Theory of
Communication, University of Illinois 1949.

Walker, D.P., The Decline of Hell: Seventeenth Century Discussions of Eternal
Torment, London 1964.

Weber, Max, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, translated by
Talcott Parsons, London 1985.

Wittfogel, Karl A., Oriental Despotism: a Comparative Study of Total Power,
London 1963.




Name index


Adorno, T.W. 12
Aquinas, T. 90, 99, 100, 101, 182,
183

Aristotle 23, 139, 140, 141
Arnobius 100
Artaud, A. 21 1

Augustine 98, 99, 100, 102, 136

Barthes, R. 1 76, 213
Bataille, G. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 16, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37,48, 49,
51,55, 56, 59,61,62, 63, 64, 65,
66,67, 68, 69, 70,71,73, 74, 79,
80, 82, 87, 88, 89, 94, 99, 104,
107, 108, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118, 119, 122, 133, 134,
149, 151, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159,
161, 163, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170,
171, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 181,
184, 185, 187, 188, 189, 191, 193,
196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 203, 205,
206, 210, 211, 213
Baudelaire, C. 198
Bernstein, J.M. 21 1
Blake, W. 200
Blanchot 61

Boltzmann, L. von 38, 39, 40, 41,
43, 44,212,213


Carnap, R. 212
Carnot, L. 37, 212
Celine, L-F. 108
Cioran, E.M. 155
Clausewitz, K: von. 149
Clausius, R. 37, 212


Deleuze, G. 13, 114, 155, 163, 211
Demeny, P. 202

de Rais, G. 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71,

72, 73, 74

Derrida, J. 5, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 24, 155, 176, 211
de Sade, Marquis 60, 61, 62, 63, 66,
137, 151, 172, 191, 192, 193, 194,
198

Descartes, R. 5, 80, 81, 82, 1 68

Ehrenfest, P. 213

Fichte, J.G. 7, 14
Foucault, M. 149
Freud, S. 9, 10, 16, 18, 21,31,37,
41,45,46,48,50, 125, 136, 149,
150, 211,213

Gatlin, L. 212
Gleick, J. 162
Guattari, F. 13, 163, 211

Hayman, R. 62

Hegel, G.W.F. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1 1,
12, 13, 14, 17, 20, 23,61, 70, 83,
103, 110, 152, 157
Heidigger, M. 5, 10, 11, 16, 18, 20,
21, 155, 211
Herakleitus 137, 150
Hillmore, P. 105
Hobbes, T. 9
Hume, D. 2
Husserl, E. 7, 16

Irenaeus 100




Name index 219


Irigaray, L. 213
Izambard, G. 202

Jacobi, C. 14

Kant, I. 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 14, 15,
16,41,45, 59, 60, 70, 72, 86, 99,
107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118, 136, 137, 139, 140,
168, 169, 211
Kierkegaard, S. 14
Klossowski, P. 155
Kullbuck, S. 212

Lacan 45, 1 76
Leibniz, G.W. 35
Lenin, V.I. 149, 198
Lockwood, J.G. 214
Lukacs, G. 10, 211
Luther, M. 2, 99, 138
Lyotard, J-F. 18, 163

Mandelbrot, B. 161, 163, 165
Marx, K. 5, 13, 14, 49, 52, 54, 55,
91, 112, 149

Miller, H. 121, 124, 125, 128, 129,
130, 131

Newton, C.W. 214
Newton, I. 34, 35
Nietzche, F.W. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19,21,22, 24, 25,37,
40,41,43, 44, 59,61,63,71,77,


82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 97, 108, 114,
116, 134, 135, 137, 138, 140, 141,
142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148,
149, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159,
170, 175, 198, 211, 213

Palmen, E. 214
Plato 27, 28, 29, 45, 90, 140
Poincare, J.H. 40, 213
Proust, M. 177

Rimbaud, A. 73, 198, 201, 202, 203
Rose, G. 21 1

Sartre, J-P. 59
Saussure, F. 17

Schelling, F.W.J. von 5, 7, 8, 14, 18
Schopenhauer, A. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,

12, 13, 14, 15, 16,41,45,91, 108,
136, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 143,
145, 170
Serres, M. 2 1 1
Shannon, C.E. 212
Socrates 27, 28, 29, 144
Spinoza, B. de 17, 137
Sun Tzu 150

Walker, D.P. 101
Weaver, W. 212
Weber, M. 56, 112, 113
Wittfogel, K.A. 128, 214

Zermelo, E. 39, 213




Subject index


Abbe, The 203
abortion 141-2
abstract negation 60-1
accumulation 49, 52, 64, 65
Accursed Share, The 32, 33, 65, 165,
184

aesthetics 10, 22
agnosticism 139

annihilation 15, 33, 48, 101, 103,
119, 182, 186
annihilationism 100-2
Architecture 123
art 22-3, 44
asynchronicity 97, 104
atheism 16, 17, 18, 19, 39, 61,62,
89, 101, 174
authority 1 39, 1 76
automatic writing 124
Aztecs 32, 65

Blue of Noon, The 198, 203
Buddhism 145

capital 2, 3, 4, 21, 53, 54-5, 56, 57,
91, 108, 110, 112, 113, 119,
197-8, 213
capitalism 56, 197
Cartesianism 80-1
castration 21, 24, 26, 88, 89, 111,
125

Catholicism 2, 18, 57, 65
chance 42, 44, 156-9, 179
chaos 38, 43-4, 162-3, 179, 205
choice 135

Christianity 2, 16, 18, 24, 45, 63,
65,67, 78, 83, 87,88,99, 108,


145, 146-7

codes 96, 113, 121-2, 125
colonialism 55

communication 1, 44, 50, 51, 59,

61, 119, 157, 161, 176, 178,
184-210, 212

community 55, 71, 82, 104, 108,

136, 151, 173

composition 44, 49, 162, 164
conservation 101

consumption 56, 57, 63, 64, 65, 69,
104

continuity 16
Contre-Attague 198
creation 101

crime 59, 60, 61, 63, 69, 70-1, 72,
73, 158, 177, 192
criminality 62, 63, 65, 71, 127
critique 2, 3, 5-6, 12, 14, 20
culture 2, 35, 56, 65, 90, 123, 143,
145, 146

cyclones 106, 214

death 8, 43, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 56,
61,64, 65, 70, 72, 73, 83, 87,91,
97, 98, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104,
110, 111-12, 1 17, 123, 125, 126,
131, 134, 135, 143, 146, 164,
166-7, 168, 172, 173, 174, 176-7,
178, 179, 180-1, 182, 185, 188,
191, 192, 194, 195, 196, 203, 205,
206; drive 43, 46, 48
deconstruction 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 24, 26, 211

desire 8, 9, 10, 22, 26, 28, 36, 37,
42,45, 46, 47, 48, 70, 119, 125,



135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 144, 150,
167, 195, 196
despair 82, 1 15, 155, 201
difference 19, 45, 64, 142, 143,

168-9

discontinuity 16, 64, 122, 124, 200
disorder 37
doubt 81-2
drive 41-2, 45

economics 25-6, 51, 64—5, 113, 151,
170; solar 33, 49-50, 64, 213
economy 23, 24, 25-6, 48-9, 50, 64,
143, 173, 183; bourgeois 57;
capital 57, 113, 115; libidinal 42;
political 52, 55, 57, 149; solar 33,
49-50

Economy to the Scale of the U nicer se 185
energetics: libidinal 44
energy 34, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 48,
49, 51, 56, 65, 70, 106, 1 19, 143,
212

Enlightenment 138
entropy 37, 42, 43, 48, 49, 167, 212
epistemology 82, 99, 116, 119, 168,
169

equalization 142, 143
eroticism 61, 65, 175, 188, 189, 190,
191, 192, 206
Eroticism 188
ethnocentrism 12
eugenics 141-2
evil 59, 63, 73, 102, 151, 189
expenditure 5, 19, 23, 25, 33, 56,

57, 63, 65, 104, 149, 185

fascism 55, 196, 197, 198
feminity 2 1
fiction 186, 187
final solution 194-5
finality 138-9

gender 21
geometry 167
glory 65

God 6-7, 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21,
34, 37, 45, 59, 60, 62, 63, 69, 73,
75-9, 80-91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 97,
100, 101, 102, 103, 108, 117, 119,
121, 131, 139, 145, 146, 147, 158,


Subject index 221


170, 173, 183, 193, 196, 205, 209
goodness 135-6, 140

Hatred for Poetry, The 198
Hegelianism 4, 7-8, 103
hierarchies: theory of 45, 1 70
Hinduism 108

Humanism 8, 118, 135, 137-8, 209

idealism 7, 8, 37
identity 13, 17, 19, 102, 103,

108-18, 123, 146, 169
immanence 3, 50, 51, 115, 116, 157,
163, 168, 169-70, 171, 173, 177
Impossible, The 198, 203
industry 148, 149
infinity 4, 40, 163
information: theory of 42-3, 44,
122,212

Inner Experience 80, 108, 115, 118,
161, 165, 177
Islam 65, 106

jealousy 92-3, 94, 95
Jesuits 2
Judaism 106
Julie 203

justice 71, 72, 73, 103, 135, 144

Kantianism 3, 5-6, 7, 8, 20, 41, 59,
72, 118, 134, 157, 213
knowing 7, 72, 81, 82, 1 16, 169
knowledge 1,12, 27, 37, 83, 1 16;
scientific 37

labour 52-5, 57, 112
Labyrinth, T he (or T he Composition of
Beings) 161

labyrinths 49, 159, 161-83, 191,

198, 199, 203

language 43, 72, 121-2, 123, 124,
125, 131, 198

law 42, 64, 70, 71, 72, 73, 144;
moral 14, 60

legislation 59, 176; moral 60
literature 60, 61, 73, 124, 136, 177,
179, 184, 186, 187, 188, 192
Literature and Evil 185
logic 59, 103, 104, 142, 158



222 Subject index


love 48, 119, 133, 154, 184, 188-90,
192; courtly 67; erotic 188, 193

Madame Edwarda 89
Marxism 49, 52, 54-5, 56
materialism 124; aesthetic 9; base
8, 116, 118, 123, 124, 158, 173;
dialectical 37; French 61;
libidinal 37, 43, 118, 123;
scientific 38
mathematics 162
matter 9, 38, 111, 121, 122, 123,
143, 145, 165, 166, 169, 170, 181,
205

Menger sponge 163-4, 165, 171
metaphysics 1-2,5, 13, 20, 21, 22,
36; German 5
Method of Meditation 1 18
monotheism 12, 14, 15, 18, 24, 79,
80, 90, 92, 102, 109, 138, 144,
147, 173, 210

morality 79, 124, 139, 157

negentropy 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43
neo-Kantian thought 7
nihilism 13, 19, 45, 91, 108, 110,
145, 146, 147, 153, 156
nothing 101,1 14—15
noumena 6, 7,8,9
noumenon 6, 70, 105-20, 169

objectification: grades of 45, 138,
170

On Nietzsche 155-7, 165
ontology 5, 43, 65, 81, 95, 104, 129,
143, 158, 170, 181, 182
overman 15, 145, 147, 156

personality 15, 102, 144
pessimism 12, 13-14, 45
phenomena 6
phenomenality 6, 17, 140
phenomenology 7, 16, 29;

deconstructed 16; of reason 17
Pineal Eye, The 30
Platonism 144
pleasure 45, 61

poetry 56, 72, 73, 178, 196, 198,
199-200, 202, 203, 204
politics 28, 112, 148, 197, 198, 210


post-Kantian thought 5, 14, 114,
138, 142

presence 16, 17, 19, 29
presencing 16-17
probability 158
production 49, 52, 185, 187
Propositions 87

Protestantism 57, 65, 66, 1 12;
German 147

psychoanalysis 20, 46, 79, 88, 191
Psychological Structure of Fascism , The
197

punishment 1, 71, 100, 102
purity 1 1 7

rank order 1 38

rationalism 62; enlightenment 61,
111

rationality 62, 100
reality 2, 12, 19, 25, 26, 34, 46, 170,
174,200

reason 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 20, 25, 31,
59-60,61,62, 72, 96, 103, 107,
135, 139, 142, 144, 146, 151, 155,
166, 185, 186
reasoning 82, 103, 110
recurrence 143, 162; eternal 25-6,
40, 44, 137, 143, 146, 156
regression 12, 14, 38, 62, 145, 150,
165

religion 57, 65, 81, 82, 83, 87, 89,
145, 157, 187, 203
repetition 19, 133-4
representation 5, 8, 9, 20, 28, 30,
31,45, 70,81,82, 116, 118, 129,
142, 145, 166, 169, 176, 177
repression 17, 19, 21, 26, 46, 112,
124, 131, 150, 166
responsibility 1, 20, 73
revolt 61, 62
revolution 13, 53, 55, 59
rights 59, 7 1
Rotten Sun 30

sacrifice 33, 63, 72, 87, 115, 119
Sacrifices 95, 1 58
scholarship 35-6
science 9, 34-5, 138-9, 168
separation 81, 123, 124, 168
sexuality 21, 37, 46, 50, 89, 124,




Subject index 223


125, 136, 141, 175, 187, 188
Solar Anus, The 30, 31, 88, 99
solipsism 7, 192
Somme Atheologique 99, 108
sovereignty 3, 33, 56, 59, 93
space 43, 48, 49, 129, 163, 165, 166,
167, 174

Spinozism 103, 158, 174
spirit 6-7
spiritualism 37
spiritualization 143, 144, 170
state: and philosophy 10-11, 60
Story of the Eye , The 30, 187
structural analysis 122
structure 122-3

subject/object relation 116, 168-9
Tears of Eros 1 88

teleology 138, 139, 147, 154, 157
tendency 42, 43, 44
thanatology 103, 111
thanatropism 3
theism 14, 15, 60
theology 1, 12, 14, 18, 65, 82, 99,
109, 113, 182
Theory of Religion 1 68
thermodynamics 38-9, 42, 43, 48,
211

Tibetans 65

time 39, 40, 41, 43, 94-7, 103, 112,


118, 129, 138, 163, 166, 167
transcendence 3, 5, 7, 34, 41, 42, 50,
51, 70, 72, 74, 122, 143, 168,
169-70, 171, 173
transcendental philosophy 3, 59,
107, 140, 155, 163, 168, 213
transgression 58-74
truth 2, 20, 21, 25, 28, 34, 59, 95,
124

unconscious 8, 9, 15, 16, 18, 20, 26,
31,33, 46, 62, 124, 125, 151, 173
understanding 59

virtue 136
void 164

war 4, 47-8, 65, 67, 68, 69, 71,
147-51, 167

will 8-9, 10, 13, 135, 137, 138, 140,
142, 156, 157, 211; to power 8,

15, 16, 138, 142, 156

Zeno’s paradox 166
zero 5, 19, 22, 24, 25, 26, 45, 47, 51,
87, 89, 90, 91, 102, 104, 108, 109,
110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 122, 125, 128, 129,
131, 143, 145, 146, 147, 149, 163,
173, 183, 196, 199, 205,206,213



Printed in the United States
1 23782LV00004B/40/A



780415


056083



WHY SHOULD WE READ
BATAILLE?

HAVE WE THE COURAGE
TO PURSUE HIS WORK’S
REAL CONSEQUENCES?


In this arresting and extraordinary book the reader is not
offered a secondary text, a book about Bataille, in the usual
sense. But it is a book of which Bataille would have been
proud: untamed, impassionate and fearless.

‘When I say it isn’t “about” Bataille, I don’t mean that
literally, for it says more about him in a good sense than
anything else I’ve read on the subject. It’s just that it’s not
merely analysing or criticising Bataille, but engaging with
him, and to stunning effect ... I think this is a remarkable
and powerful book - a work of literature - a rare thing
indeed.’

Sadie Plant, Birmingham University

Nick Land is a lecturer in Continental Philosophy at
Warwick University.

Philosophy/Cultural Studies/ Sociology/ Literary Theory

Front cover photograph: Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (1941). By permission of
BF1 Stills, Posters and Designs.

Cover design: Carole Oliver



11 New Fetter Lane
London EC4P4EE

29 West 35th Street
New York NY 10001


ISBN D-mS-DSbDfl-X


78


415


56


83


